Chapter 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value      1. THE DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER      The surplus-value generated in the production process by C, the capital advanced, i.e. the valorization of the value of the capital C, presents itself to us first as the amount by which the value of the product exceeds the value of its constituent elements. The capital C is made up of two components, one the sum of money c laid out on means of production, and the other the sum of money v expended on labour-power; c represents the portion of value which has been turned into constant capital, v that turned into variable capital. At the beginning, then, C= c+ v: for example, if £ is the capital advanced, its components may be such that the £ = £ constant + £ variable. When the process of production is finished, we get a commodity whose value = (c + v) + s, where s is the surplus-value; or, taking our former figures, the value of this commodity is (£ constant + £ variable) + £ surplus. The original capital has now changed from C to C′, from £ to £590. The difference is s, or a surplus-value of £90. Since the value of the constituent elements of the product is equal to the value of the capital advanced, it is a mere tautology to say that the excess of the value of the product over the value of its constituent elements is equal to the valorization of the value of the capital advanced, or to the surplus-value produced. Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more closely. The equation being made is between the value of the product and the value of its constituents consumed in the process of production. Now we have seen how that portion of the constant capital which consists of the instruments of labour transfers to the product only a fraction of its value, while the remainder of that value continues in its old form of existence. Since this remainder plays no part in the formation of value, we may at present leave it on one side. To introduce it into the calculation would make no difference. For instance, taking our former example, c = £410: assume that this sum consists of £ value of raw material, £ value of auxiliary material and £ value of the machinery worn away in the process; and assume that the total value of the machinery employed is £1,054. Out of this latter sum, then, we reckon as advanced for the purpose of turning out the product the sum of £ alone, which the machinery loses by wear and tear while performing its function, and therefore parts with to the product. Now if we also reckoned the remaining £1,000, which continues to exist in its old form in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we would also have to reckon it as part of the value advanced, and thus make it appear on both sides of our calculation. We should, in this way, get £1, on one side and £1, on the other. The difference between these two sums, or the surplus-value, would still be £90. When we refer, therefore, to constant capital advanced for the production of value, we always mean the value of the means of production actually consumed in the course of production, unless the context demonstrates the reverse. This being so, let us return to the formula C′= c + v, which we saw was transformed into C = (c + v) + s, C becoming C′. We know that the value of the constant capital is transferred to the product, and merely re-appears in it. The new value actually created in the process, the ‘value-product’, is therefore not the same as the value of the product; it is not, as it would at first sight appear, (c + v) + s or £ constant + £ variable + £ surplus, but rather v + s or £ variable + £ surplus. In other words, not £ but £180. If c, the constant capital, = O, in other words if there were branches of industry in which the capitalist could dispense with all means of production made by previous labour, whether raw material, auxiliary material, or instruments, employing only labour-power and materials supplied by nature, if that were the case, there would be no constant capital to transfer to the product. This component of the value of the product, i.e. the £ in our example, would be eliminated, but the sum of £180, the amount of new value created, or the value produced, which contains £ of surplus-value, would remain just as great as if c represented the highest value imaginable. We should have C = (O + v) = v, and C′ the valorized capital = v + s, and therefore C′– C = s as before. On the other hand, if s = O, in other words if the labour-power whose value is advanced in the form of variable capital were to produce only its equivalent, we should have C = c + v, and C′ (the value of the product) = (c + v) + O, hence C = C′. In this case the capital advanced would not have valorized its value. From what has gone before we know that surplus-value is purely the result of an alteration in the value of v, of that part of the capital which was converted into labour-power; consequently, v+s = v + Δv (v plus an increment of v). But the fact that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of that variation, are obscured by the circumstance that in consequence of the increase in the variable component of the capital, there is also an increase in the sum total of the capital advanced. It was originally £ and becomes £590. Therefore, in order that our investigation may lead to accurate results, we must make abstraction from that portion of the value of the product in which constant capital alone appears, and thus posit the constant capital as zero or make c = O. This is merely an application of a mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate with constant and variable magnitudes, related to each other only by the symbols of addition and subtraction. A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the variable capital. In our example, C′ = £ constant + £ variable+£ surplus; but £ is a given and therefore a constant quantity and hence it appears absurd to treat it as variable. In fact, however, the £ variable is here merely a symbol for the process undergone by this value. The portion of the capital invested in the purchase of labour-power is a definite quantity of objectified labour, a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased. But in the process of production the place of the £ is taken by labour-power which sets itself in motion, dead labour is replaced by living labour, something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a variable. The result is the reproduction of v plus an increment of v. From the point of view of capitalist production, therefore, the whole process appears as the independent motion of what was originally constant value, but has now been transformed into labour-power. Both the process and its result are ascribed to this independent motion of value. If, therefore, such expressions as ‘£ variable capital’ or ‘such and such a quantity of self-valorizing value’ appear to contain contradictions, this is only because they express a contradiction immanent in capitalist production. At first sight it appears strange to equate the constant capital to zero. But we do this every day. If, for example, we want to calculate the amount of profit gained by England from the cotton industry, we first of all deduct the sums paid for cotton to the United States, India, Egypt and various other countries, i.e. we posit the value of the capital that merely re-appears in the value of the product as a zero magnitude. Of course, the ratio of surplus-value not only to that portion of the capital from which it directly arises, and whose change in value it represents, but also to the sum total of the capital advanced, is economically of very great importance. We shall therefore deal exhaustively with this ratio in our third book. * In order to enable one portion of capital to realize its value by being converted into labour-power, it is necessary that another portion be converted into means of production. In order that variable capital may perform its function, constant capital must be advanced to an adequate proportion, the proportion appropriate to the special technical conditions of each labour process. However, the fact that retorts and other vessels are necessary to a chemical process does not prevent the chemist from ignoring them when he undertakes his analysis of the results. If we look at the creation and the alteration of value for themselves, i.e. in their pure form, then the means of production, this physical shape taken on by constant capital, provides only the material in which fluid, value-creating labour-power has to be incorporated. Neither the nature nor the value of this material is of any importance. All that is needed is a sufficient supply of material to absorb the labour expended in the process of production. That supply once given, the material may rise or fall in value, or even be without any value in itself, like the land and the sea; but this will have no influence on the creation of value or on the variation in the quantity of value. In the first place, therefore, we equate the constant part of capital with zero. The capital advanced is consequently reduced from c+v to v, and instead of the value of the product (c+v)+s we now have the value produced (v+s). Given that the new value produced = £180, a sum which consequently represents the whole of the labour expended during the process, if we subtract £ from it, being the value of the variable capital, we have £ left, the amount of the surplus-value. This sum of £90, or s, expresses the absolute quantity of surplus-value produced. The relative quantity produced, or the ratio in which the variable capital has valorized its value, is plainly determined by the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable capital, and expressed by s/v. In our example this ratio is 90/90, or 100 per cent. This relative increase in the value of the variable capital, or the relative magnitude of the surplus-value, is called here the rate of surplus-value. We have seen that the worker, during one part of the labour process, produces only the value of his labour-power, i.e. the value of his means of subsistence. Since his work forms part of a system based on the social division of labour, he does not directly produce his own means of subsistence. Instead of this, he produces a particular commodity, yarn for example, with a value equal to the value of his means of subsistence, or of the money for it. The part of his day’s labour devoted to this purpose will be greater or less, in proportion to the value of his average daily requirements or, what amounts to the same thing, in proportion to the labour-time required on average to produce them. If the value of his daily means of subsistence represents an average of 6 hours’ objectified labour, the worker must work an average of 6 hours to produce that value. If, instead of working for the capitalist, he worked independently on his own account, he would, other things being equal, still be obliged to work for the same number of hours in order to produce the value of his labour-power, and thereby to gain the means of subsistence necessary for his own preservation or continued reproduction. But as we have seen, during that part of his day’s labour in which he produces the value of his labour-power, say 3 shillings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his labour-power already advanced by the capitalist; the new value created only replaces the variable capital advanced. It is owing to this fact that the production of the new value of 3 shillings has the appearance of a mere reproduction. I call the portion of the working day during which this reproduction takes place necessary labour-time, and the labour expended during that time necessary labour; necessary for the worker, because independent of the particular social form of his labour; necessary for capital and the capitalist world, because the continued existence of the worker is the basis of that world. During the second period of the labour process, that in which his labour is no longer necessary labour, the worker does indeed expend labour-power, he does work, but his labour is no longer necessary labour, and he creates no value for himself. He creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the charms of something created out of nothing. This part of the working day I call surplus labour-time, and to the labour expended during that time I give the name of surplus labour. It is just as important for a correct understanding of surplus-value to conceive it as merely a congealed quantity of surplus labour-time, as nothing but objectified surplus labour, as it is for a proper comprehension of value in general to conceive it as merely a congealed quantity of so many hours of labour, as nothing but objectified labour. What distinguishes the various economic formations of society – the distinction between for example a society based on slave-labour and a society based on wage-labour – is the form in which this surplus labour is in each case extorted from the immediate producer, the worker. Since, on the one hand, the variable capital and the labour-power purchased by that capital are equal in value, and the value of this labour-power determines the necessary part of the working day; and since, on the other hand, the surplus-value is determined by the surplus part of the working day, it follows that surplus-value is in the same ratio to variable capital as surplus labour is to necessary labour. In other words, the rate of surplus value, s/ν = surplus labour/necessary labour. Both ratios, s/ν and surplus labour/necessary labour, express the necessary labour v necessary labour same thing in different ways; in the one case in the form of objectified labour, in the other in the form of living, fluid labour. The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of labour-power by capital, or of the worker by the capitalist. We assumed in our example that the value of the product = £ constant+£ variable+£ surplus, and that the capital advanced = £500. Since the surplus-value = £90, and the capital advanced = £500, we should, according to the usual way of reckoning, get 18 per cent as the rate of surplus-value (becauseit is generally confused with the rate of profit), a rate so low it might well cause a pleasant surprise to Mr Carey and other harmonizers. * But in fact the rate of surplus-value is not equal s/C or s/c+ν but to s/ν; thus it is not 90/ but 90/ = 100 per cent, which is more than five times the apparent degree of exploitation. Although, in the case we have supposed, we do not know the actual length of the working day, or the duration in days and weeks of the labour process, or the number of workers set in motion simultaneously by the variable capital of £90, the rate of surplus-value s/ν accurately discloses to us, by means of its equivalent expression, surplus labour/necessary labour, the relation between the two parts of the working day. This relation is here one of equality, being 100 per cent. Hence the worker in our example works one half of the day for himself, the other half for the capitalist. The method of calculating the rate of surplus-value is therefore, in brief, as follows. We take the total value of the product and posit the constant capital which merely re-appears in it as equal to zero. What remains is the only value that has actually been created in the process of producing the commodity. If the amount of surplus-value is given, we have only to deduct it from this remainder to find the variable capital. And vice versa if the latter is given and we need to find the surplus-value. If both are given, we have only to perform the concluding operation, namely calculate s/ν, the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable capital. Simple as the method is, it may not be amiss, by means of a few examples, to exercise the reader in the application of the novel principles underlying it. First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 10, mule spindles, spinning No. yarn from American cotton, and producing 1 lb. of yarn weekly per spindle. We assume the waste to be 6 per cent: accordingly 10, lb. of cotton are consumed weekly, of which 600 lb. go to waste. The price of the cotton in April 1871 was 7 3/4d. per lb. ; the raw material therefore costs approximately £342. The 10, spindles, including machinery for preparation and motive power, cost, we will assume, £ per spindle, amounting to a total of £10,000. Depreciation we put at 10 per cent, or £1, a year = £ a week. The rent of the building we suppose to be £ a year, or £ a week. The amount of coal consumed (for 100 h.p. indicated, at 4 lb. of coal per horse-power per hour during 60 hours, and including coal consumed in heating the mill) is 11 tons a week at 8s. 6d. a ton, and therefore comes to about £ 1/ a week; gas, £ a week, oil etc., £ 1/ a week. Total cost of the above auxiliary materials, £ a week. Therefore the constant part of the value of the week’s product is £378. Wages amount to £ a week. The price of the yarn is 12 1/4d. per lb., which gives, for the value of 10, lb., the sum of £510. The surplus-value is therefore in this case £510– £ = £80. We put the constant part of the value of the product equal to zero, as it plays no part in the creation of value. There remains £ as the weekly value created, which = £ variable + £ surplus. The rate of surplus-value is therefore 80/ = 153 11/ per cent. In a working day of 10 hours with average labour the result is: necessary labour = 3 31/ hours, and surplus labour = 6 2/33. One more example. Jacob gives the following calculation for the year 1815. Owing to the previous adjustment of several items it is very imperfect; nevertheless it is sufficient for our purpose. In it he assumes that the price of wheat is 8s. a quarter, and that the average yield per acre is 22 bushels. *    Here the assumption is always made that the price of the product is the same as its value, and, moreover, surplus-value is distributed under the various headings of profit, interest, rent etc. To us these headings are irrelevant We simply add them together, and the sum is a surplus-value of £ 11s. 0d. The sum of £ 19s. 0d. paid for seed and manure is constant capital, and we put it equal to zero. There is left the sum of £ 10s. 0d., which is the variable capital advanced, and we see that a new value of £ 10s. 0d.+ £ 11s. 0d. has been produced in its place. Therefore s/ν = £ 11s. 0d./£ 10s. 0d. i.e. more than 100 per cent. The worker employs more than half his working day in producing the surplus-value, which different persons then share amongst themselves, on different pretexts. 2. THE REPRESENTATION OF THE VALUE OF THE PRODUCT BY CORRESPONDING PROPORTIONAL PARTS OF THE PRODUCT      Let us now return to the example which showed us how the capitalist converts money into capital. The necessary labour of his spinning worker amounted to 6 hours, surplus labour was the same, the degree of exploitation of labour-power was therefore 100 per cent. The product of a working day of 12 hours is 20 lb. of yarn, having a value of 30s. No less than eight-tenths of this value, or 24s., is formed by the mere re-appearance in it of the value of the means of production ( lb. of cotton, value 20s., and the worn part of the spindle, 4s.). In other words, this part consists of constant capital. The remaining two-tenths, or 6s., is the new value created during the spinning process; one half of this replaces the value of the day’s labour-power, or the variable capital, the remaining half constitutes a surplus-value of 3s. The total value of the 20 lb. of yarn is thus made up as follows:    30s. value of yarn = 24s. constant + 3s. variable + 3s. surplus. Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lb. of yarn produced, it follows that the various component parts of this value can be represented as being contained respectively in proportional parts of the product. If the value of 30s. is contained in 20 lb. of yarn, then eight-tenths of this value, or the 24s. that forms its constant part, is contained in eight-tenths of the product, or in 16 lb. of yarn. Of the latter, 13 1/ lb. represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. worth of cotton spun, and 2 2/ lb. represent the 4s. worth of spindle etc. worn away in the process. Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 lb. of yarn is represented by 13 1/ lb. of yarn. This latter weight of yarn admittedly contains by weight no more than 13 1/ lb. of cotton, worth 13 1/3s. ; but the 6 2/3s. additional value contained in it is the equivalent for the cotton consumed in spinning the remaining 6 2/ lb. of yarn. The effect is the same as if these 6 2/ lb. of yarn contained no cotton at all, and the whole 20 lb. of cotton were concentrated in the 13 1/ lb. of yarn. The latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain an atom of the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour, or of the value newly created in the process. In the same way, the 2 2/ lb. of yarn in which the 4s., the remainder of the constant capital, is embodied represent nothing but the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour consumed in producing the 20 lb. of yarn. We have therefore arrived at this result: although eight-tenths of the product, or 16 lb. of yarn, seen in its physical existence as a use-value, is just as much the fabric of the spinner’s labour as the remainder of the same product, yet when viewed in this connection it does not contain and has not absorbed any labour expended during the process of spinning. It is just as if the cotton had converted itself into yarn without any help, it is just as if the shape it had assumed was mere trickery and deceit. In fact, when the capitalist has sold it for 24s. and, with the money, replaced his means of production it becomes evident that the 16 lb. of yarn is nothing more than cotton, spindle-waste and coal in disguise. On the other hand, the remaining two-tenths of the product, or 4 lb. of yarn, represent nothing but the new value of 6s. created during the 12 hours’ spinning process. All the value transferred to those 4 lb. from the raw material and instruments of labour consumed was so to speak intercepted in order to be incorporated in the 16 lb. first spun. In this case, it is as if the spinner had spun 4 lb. of yarn out of air, or as if he had spun it with the aid of cotton and spindles which were available in nature, without human intervention, and therefore transferred no value to the product. Of this 4 lb. of yarn, in which the whole of the value created in the daily process of spinning is condensed, one half represents the equivalent for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. of variable capital, the other half represents the 3s. of surplus-value. Since 12 hours’ labour put in by the spinner are objectified in 6s., it follows that 60 hours’ labour are objectified in yarn of the value of 30s. And this quantity of labour-time does in fact exist in the 20 lb. of yarn; for eight-tenths of the yarn, or 16 lb., is a materialization of the 48 hours’ labour expended before the beginning of the spinning process on the means of production; the other two-tenths, or 4 lb., is a materialization of the 12 hours’ labour expended during the process itself. On a former page* we saw that the value of the yarn is equal to the new value created during the production of that yarn plus the value previously existing in the means of production. It has now been shown how the different constituents of the value of the product, distinguished according to their function or according to their concept, may be represented by corresponding proportional parts of the product itself. In this way, the product, i.e. the result of the process of production, is split up into different parts, one part representing only the labour previously spent on the means of production, or the constant capital, another part only the necessary labour spent during the process of production, or the variable capital, and another and last part only the surplus labour expended during the process, or the surplus-value. The decomposition of the product is as simple a task as it is important; this will be seen later when we apply it to complex and hitherto unsolved problems. So far we have treated the total product as the final result, ready for use, of a working day of 12 hours. We can, however, also follow this total product through all the stages of its production; and in this way we shall arrive at the same result as before if we represent the partial products, precipitated at different stages, as functionally distinct parts of the final or total product. The spinner produces 20 lb. of yarn in 12 hours. Hence he produces 1 2/ lb. in 1 hour, and 13 1/ lb. in 8 hours, or a partial product equal in value to all the cotton that is spun in a whole day. Similarly, the partial product of the next period of 1 hour and 36 minutes is 2 2/ lb. of yarn. This represents the value of the instruments of labour that are consumed in 12 hours. In the following hour and 12 minutes the spinner produces 2 lb. of yarn worth 3s., a value equal to the whole value he creates in his 6 hours of necessary labour. Finally, in the last hour and 12 minutes he produces another 2 lb. of yarn, whose value is equal to the surplus-value created by his surplus labour in the course of half a day. This method of calculation serves the English manufacturer for everyday use; it shows, he will say, that in the first 8 hours, or 2/ of the working day, he gets back the value of his cotton; and so on for the remaining hours. It is also a perfectly correct method, since it is in fact the first method given above, only transferred from the spatial sphere, in which the different parts of the completed product lie side by side, to the temporal sphere, in which those parts are produced in succession. But it can also be accompanied by very barbaric notions, especially in the heads of people who are as much interested, practically, in the valorization process, as they are, theoretically, in misunderstanding it. It may be imagined, for instance, that our spinner produces or replaces in the first 8 hours of the working day the value of the cotton, in the following hour and 36 minutes the value of the deterioration in the instruments of labour, in the next hour and 12 minutes the value of his wages, and finally that he devotes only the famous ‘last hour’ to the production of surplus-value for the factory-owner. In this way the spinner is made to perform the twofold miracle not only of producing cotton, spindles, steam-engine, coal, oil, etc., at the same time as he is using them to spin, but also of turning one working day of a given level of intensity into five similar days. For, in the example we are considering, the production of the raw material and the instruments of labour requires 24 divided by 6 = 4 working days of 12 hours each, and their conversion into yarn requires another such day. That the love of profit induces an easy belief in such miracles, and that there is no lack of sycophantic doctrinaires to prove their existence is demonstrated by the following famous historical example. 3. SENIOR’S ‘LAST HOUR’      One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. Senior, who may be called the Clauren* of the English economists, a man famed both for his economic science and his beautiful style, was summoned from Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the latter place the political economy he taught in the former. The manufacturers chose him as their prize-fighter, not only against the newly passed Factory Act† but against the Ten Hours’ Agitation which aimed to go beyond it. With their usual practical acuteness they had realized that the learned professor ‘wanted a good deal of finishing’; that is why they invited him to Manchester. For his part, the professor has embodied the lecture he received from the Manchester manufacturers in a pamphlet entitled Letters on the Factory Act, as it Affects the Cotton Manufacture (London, 1837). Here we find, amongst other things, the following edifying passage:    ‘Under the present law, no mill in which persons under 18 years of age are employed… can be worked more than 11 1/ hours a day, that is, 12 hours for 5 days in the week, and 9 on Saturday. Now the following analysis (!) will show that in a mill so worked, the whole net profit is derived from the last hour. I will suppose a manufacturer to invest £100, – £80, in his mill and machinery, and £20, in raw material and wages. The annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned once a year, and gross profits to be 15 per cent, ought to be goods worth £115,000… Of this £115, each of the twenty-three half-hours of work produces five 115ths, or one 23rd. Of these twenty-three 23rds (constituting the whole £115,000), twenty, that is to say £100, out of the £115,000, simply replace the capital; one 23rd (or £5, out of the £115,000) makes up for the deterioration of the mill and machinery. The remaining two 23rds, that is the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day, produce the net profit of 10 per cent. If, therefore (prices remaining the same), the factory could be kept at work 13 hours instead of 11 1/2, with an addition of about £2, to the circulating capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. On the other hand, if the hours of working were reduced by one hour per day (prices remaining the same), the net profit would be destroyed – if they were reduced by one hour and a half, even the gross profit would be destroyed.’    And the professor calls this an ‘analysis’! If he believed the out-cries of the manufacturers to the effect that the workers spent the best part of the day in the production, i.e. the reproduction or replacement, of the value of the buildings, machinery, cotton, coal, etc., then his analysis was superfluous. His answer could simply have been this: ‘Gentlemen! If you work your mills for 10 hours instead of 11 1/2, then, other things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton, machinery etc. will decrease in proportion. You gain just as much as you lose. Your workpeople will in future spend one hour and a half less time in reproducing or replacing the capital advanced.’ If, on the other hand, he did not take them at their word but, being an expert in such matters, considered it necessary to undertake an analysis, then he ought, in a question which turns exclusively on the relation of the net profit to the length of the working day, above all to have asked the manufacturers to be careful not to lump together machinery, workshops, raw material and labour, but to be good enough to place the constant capital, invested in buildings, machinery, raw material etc., on one side of the account and the capital advanced in wages on the other side. If it then turned out that, according to the calculations of the manufacturers, the worker reproduced or replaced his wages in 2 half hours, in that case, he should have continued his analysis as follows: ‘According to your figures, the workman produces his wages in the last hour but one, and your surplus-value, or net profit, in the last hour. Now, since in equal periods he produces equal values, the product of the last hour but one must have the same value as that of the last hour. Further, it is only while he works that he produces any value at all, and the quantity of work he does is measured by his labour-time. This you say amounts to 11 1/ hours a day. He employs one portion of these 11 1/ hours in producing or replacing his wages, and the remaining portion in producing your net profit. Beyond this he does absolutely nothing. But since, on your assumption, his wages and the surplus-value he provides are of equal value, it is clear that he produces his wages in 5 3/ hours, and your net profit in the other 5 3/ hours. Again, since the value of the yarn produced in 2 hours is equal to the sum of the value of his wages and of your net profit, the measure of the value of this yarn must be 11 1/ working hours, of which 5 3/ hours measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour but one, and 5 3/ hours the value of the yarn produced in the last hour of all. We now come to a ticklish point, so watch out! The last working hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary working hour, neither more nor less. How then can the spinner produce in one hour, in the shape of yarn, a value that embodies 5 3/ hours’ labour? The truth is that he does not perform any such miracle. The use-value produced by him in one hour is a definite quantity of yarn. The value of this yarn is measured by 5 3/ working hours, of which 4 3/ were, without any assistance from him, previously embodied in the means of production, in the cotton, the machinery, and so on; the remaining one hour alone is added by him. Therefore, since his wages are produced in 5 3/ hours, and the yarn produced in one hour also contains 5 3/ hours’ work, there is no witchcraft in the result that the value created by his 5 3/ hours of spinning is equal to the value of the product spun in one hour. You are altogether on the wrong track, if you think that he loses a single moment of his working day in reproducing or replacing the values of the cotton, the machinery and so on. On the contrary, it is because his labour converts the cotton and the spindles into yarn, because he spins, that the values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn of their own accord. This is a result of the quality of his labour, not its quantity. It is true that he will transfer to the yarn more value, in the shape of cotton, in one hour than he will in half an hour. But that is only because in one hour he spins up more cotton than in half an hour. You see then that your assertion that the workman produces, in the last hour but one, the value of his wages, and in the last hour your net profit, amounts to no more than this, that in the yarn produced by him in 2 working hours, whether they are the 2 first or the 2 last hours of the working day, there are incorporated 11 1/ working hours, i.e. precisely as many hours as there are in his working day. And my assertion that in the first 5 3/ hours he produces his wages, and in the last 5 3/ hours your net profit, amounts only to this, that you pay him for the former, but not for the latter. In speaking of payment of labour, instead of payment of labour-power, I am only using your own slang expression. Now gentlemen, if you compare the working time you pay for with the working time you do not pay for, you will find that they are related to each other as half a day is to half a day; this gives a rate of 100 per cent, and a very pretty percentage it is. Further, there is not the least doubt that if you make your “hands” toil for 13 hours instead of 11 1/2, and as may be expected from you, if you treat the work done in that extra one hour and a half as pure surplus labour, then the latter will be increased from 5 1/ hours’ labour to 7 1/ hours’ labour, and the rate of surplus-value will go up from 100 per cent to 126 2/ per cent. So that you are altogether too sanguine in expecting that by such an addition of 1 1/ hours to the working day the rate will rise from 100 per cent to 200 per cent and more, in other words that it will be “more than doubled”. On the other hand – the heart of man is a wonderful thing, especially when it is carried in his wallet – you take too pessimistic a view when you fear that a reduction of the hours of labour from 11 1/ to 10 will sweep away the whole of your net profit. Not at all. All other conditions remaining the same, the surplus labour will fall from 5 3/ hours to 4 3/ hours, a period that still gives a very profitable rate of surplus-value, namely 82 14/ per cent. But this fateful “last hour” about which you have invented more stories than the millenarians about the Day of Judgement, is “all bosh”. If it goes, it will not cost you your “pure profit”, nor will it cost the boys and girls you employ their “pure minds”.11’ Whenever your “last hour” strikes in earnest, think of the Oxford professor. And now, gentlemen, farewell, and may we meet again in a better world, but not before.’12… The battle-cry of the ‘last hour’, invented by Senior in 1836, was raised once again in the London Economist of 15 April 1848 by James Wilson, an economic mandarin of high standing, in a polemic against the Ten Hours’ Bill. *  4. THE SURPLUS PRODUCT      We call the portion of the product that represents surplus-value (i.e. one-tenth of the 20 lb., or 2 lb. of yarn, in the example given above) by the name of ‘surplus product’ (Mehrprodukt, produit net). Just as the rate of surplus-value is determined by its relation, not to the sum total of the capital, but to its variable part, in the same way, the relative amount of the surplus product is determined by its ratio, not to the remaining part of the total product, but to that part of it in which necessary labour is incorporated. Since the production of surplus-value is the determining purpose of capitalist production, the size of a given quantity of wealth must be measured, not by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative magnitude of the surplus product. The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus labour, i.e. the sum of the periods of time during which the worker respectively replaces the value of his labour-power and produces the surplus-value, constitutes the absolute extent of his labour-time, i.e. the working day.