Chapter 11: The Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value      In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and therefore the part of the working day necessary for – the reproduction or maintenance of that labour-power, is assumed to be a given, constant magnitude. With this presupposition, the rate of surplus-value directly gives us the mass of surplus-value furnished to the capitalist by the worker within a definite period of time. If, for example, the necessary labour amounts to 6 hours a day, expressed in a quantity of gold equal to 3 shillings, then 3 shillings is the daily value of one labour-power, or the value of the capital advanced to buy one labour-power. If, further, the rate of surplus-value is 100 per cent, this variable capital of 3 shillings produces a mass of surplus-value of 3 shillings, in other words, the worker supplies every day a mass of surplus labour of 6 hours. But the variable capital is the monetary expression for the total value of all the labour-powers the capitalist employs simultaneously. Its value is therefore equal to the average value of one labour-power multiplied by the number of labour-powers employed. With a given value of labour-power, therefore, the magnitude of the variable capital varies directly with the number of workers employed simultaneously. If the daily value of one labour-power is 3 shillings, then a capital of 300 shillings must be advanced in order to exploit 100 labour-powers every day, and a capital of n× shillings must be advanced in order to exploit n labour-powers every day. In the same way, if a variable capital of 3 shillings, being the daily value of one labour-power, produces a daily surplus-value of 3 shillings, a variable capital of 300 shillings will produce a daily surplus-value of 300 shillings, and one of n × 3 shillings will produce a daily surplus-value of n × 3 shillings. The mass of surplus-value produced is therefore equal to the surplus-value provided by the working day of one worker multiplied by the number of workers employed. But as the mass of surplus-value which a single worker produces (the value of labour-power being given) is determined by the rate of surplus-value, this first law follows: the mass of surplus-value produced is equal to the amount of the variable capital advanced multiplied by the rate of surplus-value; in other words: the mass of surplus-value is determined by the product of the number of labour-powers simultaneously exploited by the same capitalist and the degree of exploitation of each individual labour-power. Let the mass of the surplus value be S, the surplus-value supplied by the individual worker in the average day s, the variable capital advanced daily in the purchase of one individual labour-power v, the sum total of the variable capital V, the value of an average labour-power P, its degree of exploitation a′/a (surplus labour/necessary labour) and the number of workers employed, n; we have, then:      We assume throughout, not only that the value of an average labour-power is constant, but that the workers employed by a capitalist are reduced to average workers. There do exist exceptional cases in which the surplus-value produced does not increase in proportion to the number of workers being exploited, but then the value of the labour-power does not remain constant. In the production of a definite mass of surplus-value, therefore, a decrease in one factor may be compensated for by an increase in the other. If the variable capital diminishes, and at the same time the rate of surplus-value increases in the same ratio, the mass of surplus-value remains unaltered. If, on our earlier assumption, the capitalist has to advance 300 shillings in order to exploit 100 workers each day, and if the rate of surplus-value amounts to 50 per cent, this variable capital of 300 shillings yields a surplus-value of 150 shillings, or 100× working hours. If the rate of surplus-value doubles, or the working day, instead of being extended from 6 to 9, is extended from 6 to 12 hours, and at the same time variable capital is reduced by half, i.e. to 150 shillings, it too yields a surplus-value of 150 shillings, or 50× working hours. A decrease in the variable capital may therefore be compensated for by a proportionate rise in the degree of exploitation of labour-power, or a decrease in the number of workers employed by a proportionate extension of the working day. Within certain limits, therefore, the supply of labour exploitable by capital is independent of the supply of workers. And, inversely, a fall in the rate of surplus-value leaves the mass of surplus-value which has been produced unaltered, if the amount of the variable capital, i.e. the number of workers employed, increases in the same proportion. Nevertheless there are limits, which cannot be overcome, to the compensation for a decrease in the number of workers employed, i.e. a decrease in the amount of variable capital advanced, provided by a rise in the rate of surplus-value, i.e. the lengthening of the working day. Whatever the value of labour-power may be, whether the labour-time necessary for the maintenance of the worker is 2 hours or 10, the total value a worker can produce, day in, day out, is always less than the value in which 24 hours of labour are objectified. For instance, it is less than 12 shillings, if 12 shillings is the monetary expression for 24 hours of objectified labour. On our former assumption, according to which 6 hours of labour every day are necessary in order to reproduce the labour-power itself or to replace the value of the capital advanced to purchase it, a variable capital of 1, shillings, employing 500 workers at a rate of surplus-value of 100 per cent with a 12-hour working day, produces every day a surplus-value of 1, shillings, or 6 × 500 working hours. A capital of 300 shillings, employing 100 workers a day with a rate of surplus value of 200 per cent, or with a working day of 18 hours, only produces a mass of surplus-value of 600 shillings, or 12 × 100 working hours; and its total value-product, the equivalent of the variable capital advanced plus the surplus-value, can, day in, day out, never reach the sum of 1, shillings or 24 × 100 working hours. The absolute limit of the average working day – this being by nature always less than 24 hours – sets an absolute limit to the compensation for a reduction of variable capital by a higher rate of surplus-value, or for the decrease of the number of workers exploited by a higher degree of exploitation of labour-power. This self-evident second law is of importance for the explanation of many phenomena, arising from the tendency of capital to reduce as much as possible the number of workers employed, i.e. the amount of its variable component, the part which is changed into labour-power (we shall develop this tendency later on),* which stands in contradiction with its other tendency to produce the greatest possible mass of surplus-value. On the other hand, if the mass of labour-power employed or the amount of variable capital increases, but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of surplus-value, a diminution occurs in the mass of surplus-value produced. A third law results from the determination by the following two factors of the mass of surplus-value produced: rate of surplus-value and the amount of variable capital advanced. The rate of surplus-value, i.e. the degree of exploitation of labour-power, and the value of labour-power, i.e. the amount of the necessary labour-time, being given, it is self-evident that the greater the variable capital, the greater would be the mass of the value produced and of the surplus-value. If the limit of the working day is given, and also the limit of its necessary part, the mass of value and surplus-value produced by the individual capitalist is clearly exclusively dependent on the mass of labour that he sets in motion. But this, on the assumptions we have made above, depends on the mass of labour-power, or the number of workers he exploits, and this number in its turn is determined by the amount of the variable capital advanced. With a given rate of surplus-value, and a given value of labour-power, therefore, the masses of surplus-value produced vary directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced. Now we know that the capitalist divides his capital into two parts. He lays out one part on means of production. This is the constant part of his capital. He lays out the other part on living labour-power. This part forms his variable capital. On the basis of the same mode of production, the division of capital into constant and variable differs in different branches of production, and within the same branch of production, too, this relation changes with changes in the technical foundations and in the ways of linking together the processes of production in society. But whatever the proportion between the constant and the variable part of a given capital, whether it is 1:2, or 1: or 1:x, the law just laid down is not affected by this. For, according to our previous analysis, the value of the constant capital re-appears in the value of the product, but does not enter into the newly produced value, the newly created value-product. To employ 1, spinners, more raw material, spindles, etc. are of course required than to employ 100. The value of these additional means of production, however, may rise, fall, remain unaltered, be large or small; it has no influence on the valorization process performed by the labour-powers which set the means of production in motion. The law demonstrated above therefore takes this form: the masses of value and of surplus-value produced by different capitals – the value of labour-power being given and its degree of exploitation being equal – vary directly as the amounts of the variable components of these capitals, i.e. the parts which have been turned into living labour-power. This law clearly contradicts all experience based on immediate appearances. Everyone knows that a cotton spinner, who, if we consider the percentage over the whole of his applied capital, employs much constant capital and little variable capital, does not, on account of this, pocket less profit or surplus-value than a baker, who sets in motion relatively much variable capital and little constant capital. For the solution of this apparent contradiction, many intermediate terms are still needed, just as, from the standpoint of elementary algebra, many intermediate terms are needed before we can understand that 0/ may represent an actual magnitude. Classical economics holds instinctively to this law, although it has never actually formulated it, because it is a necessary consequence of the law of value. It tries to rescue the law from the contradictions of immediate experience by making a violent abstraction. We shall see later how the school of Ricardo came to grief on this stumbling-block. Vulgar economics, which like the Bourbons ‘has really learnt nothing’, relies here as elsewhere on the mere semblance as opposed to the law which regulates and determines the phenomena. In antithesis to Spinoza, it believes that ‘ignorance is a sufficient reason’. *    The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a society, day in, day out, may be regarded as a single working day. If, for example, the number of workers is a million, and the average working day is 10 hours, the social working day will consist of 10 million hours. With a given length of this working day, whether its limits are fixed physically or socially, the mass of surplus-value can be increased only by increasing the number of workers, i.e. the size of the working population. The growth of population here forms the mathematical limit to the production of surplus-value by the total social capital. And, inversely, with a given population this limit is formed by the possible lengthening of the working day. It will however be seen in the next chapter that this law holds only for the form of surplus-value dealt with up to the present. From the foregoing treatment of the production of surplus-value it follows that not every sum of money, or value, can be transformed into capital at will. In fact, it is a presupposition of this transformation that a certain minimum of money or of exchange-value is in the hands of the individual possessor of money or commodities. The minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single labour-power employed the whole year through, day in, day out, for the production of surplus-value. If this worker were in possession of his own means of production, and were satisfied to live as a worker, he could make do with the amount of labour-time necessary to reproduce his means of subsistence, say 8 hours a day. In addition to this, he would only need means of production sufficient for 8 working hours. The capitalist, on the other hand, who makes him do, besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours of surplus labour, requires an additional sum of money for furnishing the additional means of production. On our assumption, however, he would have to employ not one but two workers in order to live, on the surplus-value appropriated daily, as well as and no better than a worker, i.e. in order to be able to satisfy his needs. In this case the mere maintenance of life would be the purpose of his production, not the increase of wealth. But capitalist production presupposes the increase of wealth. To live only twice as well as an ordinary worker and, as well as that, turn half of the surplus-value produced into capital, he would have to multiply the number of workers and the minimum of the capital advanced by eight. Of course he can, like the man who is working for him, participate directly in the process of production, but then he is only a hybrid, a man between capitalist and worker, a ‘small master’. A certain stage of capitalist production necessitates that the capitalist be able to devote the whole of the time during which he functions as a capitalist, i.e. as capital personified, to the appropriation and therefore the control of the labour of others [fremde Arbeit], and to the sale of the products of that labour. The guild system of the Middle Ages therefore tried forcibly to prevent the transformation of the master of a craft into a capitalist, by limiting the number of workers a single master could employ to a very low maximum. Hence the possessor of money or commodities actually turns into a capitalist only where the minimum sum advanced for production greatly exceeds the known medieval maximum. Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law discovered by Hegel, in his Logic, that at a certain point merely quantitative differences pass over by a dialectical inversion into qualitative distinctions. The minimum sum of value the individual possessor of money or commodities must command in order to metamorphose himself into a capitalist changes with the different stages of development of capitalist production, and is at given stages different in different spheres of production, according to their special technical conditions. Certain spheres, even at the beginnings of capitalist production, require a minimum of capital which is not yet to be found in the hands of single individuals. This situation gives rise partly to state subsidies to private persons, as in France in the time of Colbert and in some German states right into our own epoch, and partly to the formation of companies with a legally secured monopoly over the conduct of certain branches of industry and commerce – the forerunners of the modern joint-stock companies. We shall not examine in detail the changes which take place in the relation between the capitalist and the wage-labourer in the course of the process of production, nor shall we deal any further with the characteristics of capital itself. Here we shall only emphasize certain main points. Capital developed within the production process until it acquired command over labour, i.e. over self-activating labour-power, in other words the worker himself. The capitalist, who is capital personified, now takes care that the worker does his work regularly and with the proper degree of intensity. Capital also developed into a coercive relation, and this compels the working class to do more work than would be required by the narrow circle of its own needs. As an agent in producing the activity of others, as an extractor of surplus labour and an exploiter of labour-power, it surpasses all earlier systems of production, which were based on directly compulsory labour, in its energy and its quality of unbounded and ruthless activity. At first capital subordinates labour on the basis of the technical conditions within which labour has been carried on up to that point in history. It does not therefore directly change the mode of production. The production of surplus-value in the form we have so far considered, by means of simple extension of the working day, appeared therefore independently of any change in the mode of production itself. It was no less effective in the old-fashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories. If we consider the process of production from the point of view of the simple labour-process, the worker is related to the means of production, not in their quality as capital, but as being the mere means and material of his own purposeful productive activity. In tanning, for example, he deals with the skins as his simple object of labour. It is not the capitalist whose skin he tans. But it is different as soon as we view the production process as a process of valorization. The means of production are at once changed into means for the absorption of the labour of others. It is no longer the worker who employs the means of production, but the means of production which employ the worker. Instead of being consumed by him as material elements of his productive activity, they consume him as the ferment necessary to their own life-process, and the life-process of capital consists solely in its own motion as self-valorizing value. Furnaces and workshops that stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour, are ‘a mere loss’ to the capitalist. Hence furnaces and workshops constitute ‘lawful claims upon the night-labour’ of the labour-powers. As soon as a certain sum of money is transformed into means of production, i.e. into the objective factors of the production process, the means of production themselves are transformed into a title, both by right and by might, to the labour and surplus labour of others. An example will show, in conclusion, how this inversion, indeed this distortion, which is peculiar to and characteristic of capitalist production, of the relation between dead labour and living labour, between value and the force that creates value, is mirrored in the consciousness of the capitalist. During the English manufacturers’ revolt of 1848–50, ‘the head of one of the oldest and most respectable houses in the West of Scotland, Messrs Carlile Sons & Co., of the linen and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has now existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, and four generations of the same family have conducted it…’, this ‘very intelligent gentleman’ wrote a letter printed in the Glasgow Daily Mail of 25 April 1849, under the heading ‘The Relay System’, where the following grotesquely naïve passage, among others, crept in: ‘Let us now… see what evils will attend the limiting to 10 hours the working of the factory… They amount to the most serious damage to the mill-owner’s prospects and property. If he’ (i.e. his ‘hands’) ‘worked 12 hours before, and is limited to 10, then every 12 machines or spindles in his establishment shrink to 10, and should the works be disposed of, they will be valued only as 10, so that a sixth part would thus be deducted from the value of every factory in the country.’    In this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, which has inherited the capitalist qualities of ‘four generations’, the value of the means of production, spindles, etc., is so inextricably confused with the quality they possess, as capital, of valorizing themselves, or swallowing up every day a definite quantity of the unpaid labour of others, that the head of the firm of Carlile & Co. actually imagines that if he sells his factory, not only will the value of the spindles be paid to him, but, in addition, their power of self-valorization, not only the labour contained in them, which is necessary to the production of spindles of this kind, but also the surplus labour which they help to pump out daily from the brave Scots of Paisley. This is why he thinks that with the shortening of the working day by 2 hours, the selling-price of 12 spinning machines dwindles to that of 10!