Chapter 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value      That portion of the working day which merely produces an equivalent for the value paid by the capitalist for his labour-power has up to this point been treated by us as a constant magnitude. And so it is, under given conditions of production and at a given stage in the economic development of society. As we saw, the worker could continue to work for 2, 3, 4, 6, etc. hours beyond this, his necessary labour-time. The rate of surplus-value and the length of the working day depended on how far this extra time was prolonged. Although the necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the total working day was variable. Now suppose we have a working day whose length and whose division between necessary labour and surplus labour are given. Let the whole line AC,    A––––––––––B––C    represent, for example, a working day of 12 hours; the section AB represents 10 hours of necessary labour, and the section BC represents 2 hours of surplus labour. How can the production of surplus-value be increased, i.e. how can surplus labour be prolonged, without any prolongation, or independently of any prolongation, of the line AC? Although the boundaries of the working day, A and C, are given, it would seem possible to lengthen the line BC, other than by extension beyond its end point C, which is also the end of the working day AC, by pushing back its starting point B in the direction of A. Assume that B’B in the line    A–––––––––B’–B––C    is equal to half of BC, or to 1 hour’s labour-time. If now, in AC, the working day of 12 hours, we move point B to B′, then BC becomes B’C; the surplus labour increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, although the working day remains 12 hours as before. This extension of the surplus labour-time from BC to B’C, from 2 hours to 3 hours, is however evidently impossible without a simultaneous contraction of the necessary labour-time from AB to AB’, from 10 hours to 9 hours. The prolongation of surplus labour would correspond to a shortening of necessary labour; i.e. a portion of the labour-time previously consumed, in reality, for the worker’s own benefit would be converted into labour-time expended for the capitalist. There would be an alteration, not in the length of the working day, but in its division into necessary labour-time and surplus labour-time. On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of surplus labour is given when the length of the working day and the value of labour-power are given. The value of labour-power, i.e. the labour-time necessary to produce labour-power, determines the labour-time necessary for the reproduction of the value of labour-power. If 1 hour of work is embodied in sixpence, and the value of a day’s labour-power is 5 shillings, the worker must work for 10 hours a day in order to replace the value paid by capital for his labour-power, or to produce an equivalent for the value of the means of subsistence he needs to consume every day. Given the value of these means of subsistence, the value of his labour-power can be calculated; and given the value of his labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour-time. The duration of the surplus labour, however, is arrived at by subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total working day: 10 from 12 leaves 2, and it is not easy to see how, under the given conditions, the surplus labour can possibly be prolonged beyond 2 hours. No doubt the capitalist could, instead of 5s., pay the worker 4s. 6d. or even less. hours’ labour-time would be sufficient to reproduce this value of 4s. 6d. ; and consequently 3 hours of surplus labour, instead of 2, would accrue to the capitalist, and the surplus-value would rise from 1s. to 1s. 6d. This result, however, could be attained only by pushing the wage of the worker down below the value of his labour-power. With the 4s. 6d. which he produces in 9 hours, he commands one-tenth less of the means of subsistence than before, and consequently the reproduction of his labour-power can take place only in a stunted form. The surplus labour would in this case be prolonged only by transgressing its normal limits; its domain would be extended only by a usurpation of part of the domain of necessary labour-time. Despite the important part which this method plays in practice, we are excluded from considering it here by our assumption that all commodities, including labour-power, are bought and sold at their full value. If we once assume this, it follows that the labour-time necessary for the production of labour-power, or for the reproduction of its value, cannot be lessened by a fall in the worker’s wages below the value of his labour-power, but only by a fall in this value itself. Given the length of the working day, the prolongation of the surplus labour must of necessity originate in the curtailment of the necessary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the former. In the example we chose, the value of labour-power had to fall in fact by one-tenth in order for the necessary labour-time to be diminished by one-tenth, i.e. from 10 hours to 9, and for the surplus labour to consequently be prolonged from 2 hours to 3. A fall of this kind in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the same means of subsistence formerly produced in 10 hours can now be produced in 9 hours. But this is impossible without an increase in the productivity of labour. For example, suppose a cobbler, with a given set of tools, makes one pair of boots in one working day of 12 hours. If he is to make two pairs in the same time, the productivity of his labour must be doubled; and this cannot be done except by an alteration in his tools or in his mode of working, or both. Hence the conditions of production of his labour, i.e. his mode of production, and the labour process itself, must be revolutionized. By an increase in the productivity of labour, we mean an alteration in the labour process of such a kind as to shorten the labour-time socially necessary for the production of a commodity, and to endow a given quantity of labour with the power of producing a greater quantity of use-value. Hitherto, in dealing with the production of surplus-value in the above form, we have assumed that the mode of production is given and invariable. But when surplus-value has to be produced by the conversion of necessary labour into surplus labour, it by no means suffices for capital to take over the labour process in its given or historically transmitted shape, and then simply to prolong its duration. The technical and social conditions of the process and consequently the mode of production itself must be revolutionized before the productivity of labour can be increased. Then, with the increase in the productivity of labour, the value of labour-power will fall, and the portion of the working day necessary for the reproduction of that value will be shortened. I call that surplus-value which is produced by the lengthening of the working day, absolute surplus-value. In contrast to this, I call that surplus-value which arises from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two components of the working day, relative surplus-value. In order to make the value of labour-power go down, the rise in the productivity of labour must seize upon those branches of industry whose products determine the value of labour-power, and consequently either belong to the category of normal means of subsistence, or are capable of replacing them. But the value of a commodity is determined not only by the quantity of labour which gives it its final form, but also by the quantity of labour contained in the instruments by which it has been produced. For instance, the value of a pair of boots depends not only on the labour of the cobbler, but also on the value of the leather, wax, thread, etc. Hence a fall in the value of labour-power is also brought about by an increase in the productivity of labour, and by a corresponding cheapening of commodities in those industries which supply the instruments of labour and the material for labour, i.e. the physical elements of constant capital which are required for producing the means of subsistence. But an increase in the productivity of labour in those branches of industry which supply neither the necessary means of subsistence nor the means by which they are produced leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed. The cheapening of the commodity, of course, causes only a relative fall in the value of labour-power, a fall proportional to the extent to which that commodity enters into the reproduction of labour-power. Shirts, for instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, but are only one out of many. The total sum of the necessary means of subsistence, however, consists of various commodities, each the product of a distinct industry; and the value of each of those commodities enters as a component part into the value of labour-power. The latter value decreases with the decrease of the labour-time necessary for its reproduction. The total decrease of necessary labour-time is equal to the sum of all the different reductions in labour-time which have occurred in those various distinct branches of production. Here we treat this general result as if it were the direct result and the direct purpose in each individual case. When an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by increasing the productivity of labour, he by no means necessarily aims to reduce the value of labour-power and shorten necessary labour-time in proportion to this. But he contributes towards increasing the general rate of surplus-value only in so far as he ultimately contributes to this result. The general and necessary tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of appearance. While it is not our intention here to consider the way in which the immanent laws of capitalist production manifest themselves in the external movement of the individual capitals, assert themselves as the coercive laws of competition, and therefore enter into the consciousness of the individual capitalist as the motives which drive him forward, this much is clear: a scientific analysis of competition is possible only if we can grasp the inner nature of capital, just as the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies are intellgible only to someone who is acquainted with their real motions, which are not perceptible to the senses. Nevertheless, for the understanding of the production of relative surplus-value, and merely on the basis of the results already achieved, we may add the following remarks. If 1 hour’s labour is embodied in 6d., a value of 6s. will be produced in a working day of 12 hours. Suppose that with labour of the currently prevailing productivity twelve articles are produced in these 12 hours. Let the value of the means of production used up in each article be 6d. Under these circumstances, each article costs Is. : 6d. for the value of the means of production, and 6d. for the value newly added in working with those means. Now let some one capitalist contrive to double the productivity of labour, and to produce twenty-four instead of twelve articles in the course of a working day of 12 hours. The value of the means of production remaining the same, the value of each article will fall to 9d., made up of 6d. for the value of the means of production and 3d. for the value newly added by the labour. Even though the productivity of labour has been doubled, the day’s labour creates, as before, a new value of 6s. and no more, which is now however spread over twice as many articles. Each article now has embodied in it 1/24th of this value instead of 1/12th, 3d. instead of 6d. ; or, what amounts to the same thing, only half an hour of labour-time, instead of a whole hour, is now added to the means of production while they are being transformed into each article. The individual value of these articles is now below their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour-time than the great bulk of the same article produced under the average social conditions. Each article costs, on an average, Is., and represents 2 hours of social labour; but under the altered mode of production it costs only 9d., or contains only 1 1/ hours’ labour. The real value of a commodity, however, is not its individual, but its social value; that is to say, its value is not measured by the labour-time that the article costs the producer in each individual case, but by the labour-time socially required for its production. If, therefore, the capitalist who applies the new method sells his commodity at its social value of one shilling, he sells it for 3d. above its individual value, and thus he realizes an extra surplus-value of 3d. On the other hand, the working day of 12 hours is now represented, for him, by twenty-four articles instead of twelve. Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one working day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e. the market must become twice as extensive. Other things being equal, the capitalist’s commodities can only command a more extensive market if their prices are reduced. He will therefore sell them above their individual but below their social value, say at 10d. each. By this means he still squeezes an extra surplus-value of one penny out of each. This augmentation of surplus-value is pocketed by the capitalist himself, whether or not his commodities belong to the class of necessary means of subsistence, and therefore participate in determining the general value of labour-power. Hence, quite independently of this, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheapen his commodities by increasing the productivity of labour. Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of surplus-value arises from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and the corresponding prolongation of the surplus labour. Let the necessary labour-time amount to 10 hours, the value of a day’s labour-power to 5s., the surplus labour-time to 2 hours, and the daily surplus-value to Is. But the capitalist now produces 24 articles, which he sells at 10d. each, making 20s. in all. Since the value of the means of production is 12s., 14 2/ of these articles merely replace the constant capital advanced. The labour of the 12-hour working day is represented by the remaining 9 3/ articles. Since the price of the labour-power is 5s., 6 articles represent the necessary labour-time, and 3 3/ articles the surplus labour. The ratio of necessary labour to surplus labour, which under average social conditions was 5:1, is now only 5:3. We may arrive at the same result in the following way. The value of the product of the working day of 12 hours is 20s. Of this sum, 12s. represent the value of the means of production, a value that merely re-appears in the finished product. There remain 8s., which are the expression in money of the value newly created during the working day. This sum is greater than the sum in which average social labour of the same kind is expressed: 12 hours of the latter labour are expressed by only 6s. The exceptionally productive labour acts as intensified labour; it creates in equal periods of time greater values than average social labour of the same kind. * But our capitalist still continues to pay as before only 5s. as the daily value of labour-power. Hence, instead of 10 hours, the worker now needs to work for only 7 1/ hours in order to reproduce this value. His surplus labour is therefore increased by 2 4/ hours, and the surplus-value he produces grows from one into 3s. Hence the capitalist who applies the improved method of production appropriates and devotes to surplus labour a greater portion of the working day than the other capitalists in the same business. He does as an individual what capital itself taken as a whole does when engaged in producing relative surplus-value. On the other hand, however, this extra surplus-value vanishes as soon as the new method of production is generalized, for then the difference between the individual value of the cheapened commodity and its social value vanishes. The law of the determination of value by labour-time makes itself felt to the individual capitalist who applies the new method of production by compelling him to sell his goods under their social value; this same law, acting as a coercive law of competition, forces his competitors to adopt the new method. The general rate of surplus-value is therefore ultimately affected by the whole process only when the increase in the productivity of labour has seized upon those branches of production and cheapened those commodities that contribute towards the necessary means of subsistence, and are therefore elements of the value of labour-power. The value of commodities stands in inverse ratio to the productivity of labour. So, too, does the value of labour-power, since it depends on the values of commodities. Relative surplus-value, however, is directly proportional to the productivity of labour. It rises and falls together with productivity. The value of money being assumed to be constant, an average social working day of 12 hours always produces the same new value, 6s., no matter how this sum may be apportioned between surplus-value and wages. But if, as a result of an increase in productivity, there is a fall in the value of the means of subsistence, and the daily value of labour-power is thereby reduced from 5s. to 3, the surplus-value will increase from Is. to 3. hours were necessary for the reproduction of the value of the labour-power; now only 6 are required. hours have been set free, and can be annexed to the domain of surplus labour. Capital therefore has an immanent drive, and a constant tendency, towards increasing the productivity of labour, in order to cheapen commodities and, by cheapening commodities, to cheapen the worker himself. The absolute value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the capitalist who produces it. All that interests him is the surplus-value present in it, which can be realized by sale. Realization [Realisierung] of the surplus-value necessarily carries with it the replacement of the value advanced. Now, since relative surplus-value increases in direct proportion to the development of the productivity of labour, while the value of commodities stands in precisely the opposite relation to the growth of productivity; since the same process both cheapens commodities and augments the surplus-value contained in them, we have here the solution of the following riddle: Why does the capitalist, whose sole concern is to produce exchange-value, continually strive to bring down the exchange-value of commodities? One of the founders of political economy, Quesnay, used to torment his opponents with this question, and they could find no answer to it. ‘You acknowledge,’ he says, ‘that the more one can reduce the expenses and costs of labour in the manufacture of industrial products, without injury to production, the more advantageous is that reduction, because it diminishes the price of the finished article. And yet you believe that the production of wealth, which arises from the labour of the craftsmen, consists in the augmentation of the exchange-value of their products.’    The shortening of the working day, therefore, is by no means what is aimed at in capitalist production, when labour is economized by increasing its productivity. It is only the shortening of the labour-time necessary for the production of a definite quantity of commodities that is aimed at. The fact that the worker, when the productivity of his labour has been increased, produces say ten times as many commodities as before, and thus spends one-tenth as much labour-time on each, by no means prevents him from continuing to work 12 hours as before, nor from producing in those 12 hours 1, articles instead of 120. Indeed, his working day may simultaneously be prolonged, so as to make him produce say 1, articles in 14 hours. Therefore in the treatises of economists of the stamp of MacCulloch, Ure, Senior and the like, we may read on one page that the worker owes a debt of gratitude to capital for developing his productivity, because the necessary labour-time is thereby shortened, and on the next page that he must prove his gratitude by working in future for 15 hours instead of 10. The objective of the development of the productivity of labour within the context of capitalist production is the shortening of that part of the working day in which the worker must work for himself, and the lengthening, thereby, of the other part of the day, in which he is free to work for nothing for the capitalist. How far this result can also be attained without cheapening commodities will appear from the following chapters, where we examine the particular methods of producing relative surplus-value.