Chapter 15: Machinery and Large-Scale Industry      1. THE DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINERY      John Stuart Mill says in his Principles of Political Economy:’It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day’s toil of any human being.’ That is, however, by no means the aim of the application of machinery under capitalism. Like every other instrument for increasing the productivity of labour, machinery is intended to cheapen commodities and, by shortening the part of the working day in which the worker works for himself, to lengthen the other part, the part he gives to the capitalist for nothing. The machine is a means for producing surplus-value. In manufacture the transformation of the mode of production takes labour-power as its starting-point. In large-scale industry, on the other hand, the instruments of labour are the starting-point. We have first to investigate, then, how the instruments of labour are converted from tools into machines, or what the difference is between a machine and an implement used in a handicraft. We are concerned here only with broad and general characteristics, for epochs in the history of society are no more separated from each other by strict and abstract lines of demarcation than are geological epochs. Mathematicians and experts on mechanics – and they are occasionally followed in this by English economists – call a tool a simple machine and a machine a complex tool. They see no essential difference between them, and even give the name of machine to simple mechanical aids such as the lever, the inclined plane, the screw, the wedge, etc. As a matter of fact, every machine is a combination of these simple aids, or powers, no matter how they may be disguised. From the economic standpoint however, this explanation is worth nothing, because the historical element is missing from it. Again, some people try to explain the difference between a tool and a machine by saying that in the case of the tool, man is the motive power, whereas the power behind the machine is a natural force independent of man, as for instance an animal, water, wind and so on. According to this, a plough drawn by oxen, which is common to the most diverse epochs of production, would be a machine, while Claussen’s circular loom, which weaves 96, picks a minute, though it is set in motion by the hand of one single worker, would be a mere tool. Indeed, this same loom, though a tool when worked by hand, would be a machine if worked by steam. And since the application of animal power is one of man’s earliest inventions, production by machinery would have preceded production by handicrafts. When in 1735 John Wyatt announced his spinning machine, and thereby started the industrial revolution of the eighteenth century, he nowhere mentioned that a donkey would provide the motive power instead of a man, yet this is what actually happened. In his programme it was called a machine ‘to spin without fingers’. All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially different parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism and finally the tool or working machine. The motor mechanism acts as the driving force of the mechanism as a whole. It either generates its own motive power, like the steam-engine, the caloric-engine, the electro-magnetic machine, etc., or it receives its impulse from some already existing natural force, like the water-wheel from the descent of water down an incline, the windmill from the wind, and so on. The transmitting mechanism, composed of fly-wheels, shafting, toothed wheels, pulleys, straps, ropes, bands, pinions and gearing of the most varied kinds, regulates the motion, changes its form where necessary, as for instance from linear to circular, and divides and distributes it among the working machines. These two parts of the whole mechanism are there solely to impart motion to the working machine; using this motion the working machine then seizes on the object of labour and modifies it as desired. It is this last part of the machinery, the tool or working machine, with which the industrial revolution of the eighteenth century began. And to this day it constantly serves as the starting-point whenever a handicraft or a manufacture is turned into an industry carried on by machinery. On a closer examination of the working machine proper we rediscover in it as a general rule, though often in highly modified forms, the very apparatus and tools used by the handicraftsman or the manufacturing worker*; but there is the difference that instead of being the tools of a man they are the implements of a mechanism, mechanical implements. Either the entire machine is only a more or less altered mechanical edition of the old handicraft tool, as for instance the power-loom, or the working parts fitted in the frame of the machine are old acquaintances, as spindles are in a mule, needles in a stocking-loom, saw-blades in a sawing-machine and knives in a chopping-machine. The distinction between these tools and the actual framework of the working machine exists from their moment of entry into the world, because they continue for the most part to be produced by handicraft or by manufacture, and are afterwards fitted into the framework of the machine, which is produced by machinery. The machine, therefore, is a mechanism that, after being set in motion, performs with its tools the same operations as the worker formerly did with similar tools. Whether the motive power is derived from man, or in turn from a machine, makes no difference here. From the moment that the tool proper is taken from man and fitted into a mechanism, a machine takes the place of a mere implement. The difference strikes one at once, even in those cases where man himself continues to be the prime mover. The number of implements that he himself can use simultaneously is limited by the number of his own natural instruments of production, i.e. his own bodily organs. In Germany they tried at first to make one spinner work two spinning-wheels, that is to work simultaneously with both hands and both feet. That proved to be too exhausting. Later, a treadle spinning-wheel with two spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning who could spin two threads at once were almost as scarce as two-headed men. The Jenny, on the other hand, even at the very beginning, spun with twelve to eighteen spindles, and the stocking-loom knits with many thousand needles at once. The number of tools that a machine can bring into play simultaneously is from the outset independent of the organic limitations that confine the tools of the handicraftsman. In many manual implements the distinction between man as mere motive power and man as worker or operator properly so called is very striking indeed. For instance, the foot is merely the prime mover of the spinning-wheel, while the hand, working with the spindle, and drawing and twisting, performs the real operation of spinning. It is the second part of the handicraftsman’s implement, in this case the spindle, which is first seized on by the industrial revolution, leaving to the worker, in addition to his new labour of watching the machine with his eyes and correcting its mistakes with his hands, the merely mechanical role of acting as the motive power. On the other hand, in cases where man has always acted as a simple motive power, as for instance by turning the crank of a mill, by pumping, by moving the arm of a bellows up and down, by pounding with a mortar, etc., there is soon a call for the application of animals, water and wind as motive powers. Here and there, long before the period of manufacture, and also to some extent during that period, these implements attain the stature of machines, but without creating any revolution in the mode of production. It becomes evident in the period of large-scale industry that these implements, even in the form of manual tools, are already machines. For instance, the pumps with which the Dutch emptied the Lake of Harlem in 1836– were constructed on the principle of ordinary pumps, the only difference being that their pistons were driven by Cyclopean steam-engines, instead of by men. In England, the common and very imperfect bellows of the blacksmith is occasionally converted into a blowing-engine by connecting its arm with a steam-engine. The steam-engine itself, such as it was at its invention during the manufacturing period at the close of the seventeenth century, and such as it continued to be down to 1780, did not give rise to any industrial revolution. It was, on the contrary, the invention of machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines necessary. As soon as man, instead of working on the object of labour with a tool, becomes merely the motive power of a machine, it is purely accidental that the motive power happens to be clothed in the form of human muscles; wind, water or steam could just as well take man’s place. Of course, this does not prevent such a change of form from producing great technical alterations in a mechanism which was originally constructed to be driven by man alone. Nowadays, all machines that have to break new ground, such as sewing-machines, bread-making machines, etc. are constructed to be driven by human as well as by purely mechanical motive power, unless they have special characteristics which exclude their use on a small scale. The machine, which is the starting-point of the industrial revolution, replaces the worker, who handles a single tool, by a mechanism operating with a number of similar tools and set in motion by a single motive power, whatever the form of that power. Here we have the machine, but in its first role as a simple element in production by machinery. An increase in the size of the machine and the number of its working tools calls for a more massive mechanism to drive it; and this mechanism, in order to overcome its own inertia, requires a mightier moving power than that of man, quite apart from the fact that man is a very imperfect instrument for producing uniform and continuous motion. Now assuming that he is acting simply as a motor, that a machine has replaced the tool he was using, it is evident that he can also be replaced as a motor by natural forces. Of all the great motive forces handed down from the period of manufacture, horse-power is the worst, partly because a horse has a head of his own, partly because he is costly and the extent to which he can be used in factories is very limited. Nevertheless, the horse was used extensively during the infancy of large-scale industry. This is proved both by the complaints of the agronomists of that epoch and by the way of expressing mechanical force in terms of ‘horse-power’, which survives to this day. The wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable and, apart from this, in England, the birthplace of large-scale industry, the use of water-power preponderated even during the period of manufacture. In the seventeenth century attempts had already been made to turn two pairs of millstones with a single water-wheel. But the increased size of the transmitting mechanism came into conflict with the water-power, which was now insufficient, and this was one of the factors which gave the impulse for a more accurate investigation of the laws of friction. In the same way the irregularity caused by the motive power in mills that were set in motion by pushing and pulling a lever led to the theory, and the application, of the fly-wheel, which later played such an important part in large-scale industry. In this way, the first scientific and technical elements of large-scale industry were developed during the period of manufacturing. Arkwright’s throstle-spinning mill was from the very first turned by water. Despite this, the use of water-power as the main motive force brought with it various added difficulties. The flow of water could not be increased at will, it failed at certain seasons of the year, and above all it was essentially local. Not till the invention of Watt’s second and so-called double-acting steam-engine was a prime mover found which drew its own motive power from the consumption of coal and water, was entirely under man’s control, was mobile and a means of locomotion, was urban and not – like the water-wheel – rural, permitted production to be concentrated in towns instead of – like the water-wheels – being scattered over the countryside and, finally, was of universal technical application, and little affected in its choice of residence by local circumstances. The greatness of Watt’s genius showed itself in the specification of the patent that he took out in April 1784. In that specification his steam-engine is described, not as an invention for a specific purpose, but as an agent universally applicable in industry. Many of the applications he points out in it, for instance the steam-hammer, were not introduced until half a century later. Even so he doubted the applicability of steam to navigation. Yet steam-engines of colossal size for ocean steamers were sent to the Great Exhibition of 1851 by his successors, the firm of Boulton and Watt. As soon as tools had been converted from being manual implements of man into the parts of a mechanical apparatus, of a machine, the motive mechanism also acquired an independent form, entirely emancipated from the restraints of human strength. Thereupon the individual machine, which we have considered so far, sinks to a mere element in production by machinery. One motive mechanism was now able to drive many machines at once. The motive mechanism grows with the number of the machines that are turned simultaneously, and the transmitting mechanism becomes an extensive apparatus. We have now to distinguish the co-operation of a number of machines of one kind from a complex system of machinery. In the one case, the product is entirely made by a single machine, which performs all the various operations previously done by one handicraftsman with his tool, by a weaver with his loom, for instance, or by several handicraftsmen successively, either separately or as members of a system of manufacture. In the modern manufacture of envelopes, for example, one man folded the paper with the folder, another laid on the gum, a third turned over the flap on which the emblem is impressed, a fourth embossed the emblem and so on; and on each occasion the envelope had to change hands. One single envelope machine now performs all these operations at once, and makes more than 3, envelopes in an hour. In the London exhibition of 1862, there was an American machine for making paper cornets. It cut the paper, pasted, folded and finished 300 in a minute. Here the whole process, which under the manufacturing system was split up into a series of operations and carried out in that order, is completed by a single machine, operating a combination of different tools. Now whether such a machine is merely a reproduction of a complicated manual implement, or a combination of various simple implements specialized by manufacture, in both cases we meet again with simple cooperation in the factory, i.e. in the workshop in which machinery alone is used; and, leaving the worker out of consideration for the moment, this co-operation appears, in the first instance, as the assembling in one place of similar and simultaneously acting machines. Thus a weaving factory consists of a number of power-looms working side by side, and a sewing factory consists of a number of sewing-machines all in the same building. But there is here a technical unity in that all the machines receive their impulse simultaneously, and in an equal degree, from the pulsations of the common prime mover, which are imparted to them by the transmitting mechanism; and this mechanism, to a certain extent, is also common to them all, since only particular ramifications of it branch off to each machine. Just as a number of tools, then, form the organs of a machine, so a number of machines of one kind constitute the organs of the motive mechanism. A real machine system, however, does not take the place of these independent machines until the object of labour goes through a connected series of graduated processes carried out by a chain of mutually complementary machines of various kinds. Here we have again the co-operation by division of labour which is peculiar to manufacture, but now it appears as a combination of machines with specific functions. The tools peculiar to the various specialized workers, such as those of the beaters, combers, shearers, spinners, etc. in the manufacture of wool, are now transformed into the tools of specialized machines, each machine forming a special organ, with a special function in the combined mechanism. In those branches in which the machine system is first introduced, manufacture itself provides, in general, a natural basis for the division, and consequently the organization, of the process of production. Nevertheless, an essential difference at once appears. In manufacture, it is the workers who, either singly or in groups, must carry on each particular process with their manual implements. The worker has been appropriated by the process; but the process had previously to be adapted to the worker. This subjective principle of the division of labour no longer exists in production by machinery. Here the total process is examined objectively, viewed in and for itself, and analysed into its constitutive phases. The problem of how to execute each particular process, and to bind the different partial processes together into a whole, is solved by the aid of machines, chemistry, etc. But of course, in this case too, the theoretical conception must be perfected by accumulated experience on a large scale. Each particular machine supplies raw material to the machine next in line; and since they are all working at the same time, the product is always going through the various stages of its formation, and is also constantly in a state of transition from one phase of production to another. Just as in manufacture the direct co-operation of the specialized workers establishes a numerical proportion between the different groups, so in an organized system of machinery, where one machine is constantly kept employed by another, a fixed relation is established between their number, their size and their speed. The collective working machine, which is now an articulated system composed of various kinds of single machine, and of groups of single machines, becomes all the more perfect the more the process as a whole becomes a continuous one, i.e. the less the raw material is interrupted in its passage from the first phase to the last; in other words, the more its passage from one phase to another is effected not by the hand of man, but by the machinery itself. In manufacture, the isolation of each special process is a condition imposed by the division of labour itself, whereas in the fully developed factory the continuity of the special processes is the regulating principle. A system of machinery, whether it is based simply on the cooperation of similar machines, as in weaving, or on a combination of different machines, as in spinning, constitutes in itself a vast automaton* as soon as it is driven by a self-acting prime mover. But although the whole system may for example be driven by a steam-engine, some of the individual machines may require the aid of the worker for some of their movements (such aid was necessary for the insertion of the mule carriage before the invention of the self-acting mule, and is still necessary in the fine-spinning mills). Equally, certain parts of the machine may have to be handled by the worker like a manual tool, if the machine is to do its work. This was the case in machine-makers’ workshops, before the conversion of the slide rest into a self-actor. As soon as a machine executes, without man’s help, all the movements required to elaborate the raw material, and needs only supplementary assistance from the worker, we have an automatic system of machinery, capable of constant improvement in its details. Such improvements as the apparatus that stops a drawing frame whenever a sliver breaks, and the self-acting stop which stops the power-loom as soon as the shuttle bobbin is empty of weft, are quite modern inventions. As an example both of continuity of production and of the implementation of the automatic principle, we may take a modern paper-mill. In the paper industry generally, we may advantageously study in detail not only the distinctions between modes of production based on different means of production, but also the connection between the social relations of production and those modes of production. The old German paper-making trade provides an example of handicraft production; Holland in the seventeenth century and France in the eighteenth century provide examples of manufacture proper; and modern England provides the example of automatic fabrication. Besides these, there still exist, in India and China, two distinct ancient Asiatic forms of the same industry. An organized system of machines to which motion is communicated by the transmitting mechanism from an automatic centre is the most developed form of production by machinery. Here we have, in place of the isolated machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole factories, and whose demonic power, at first hidden by the slow and measured motions of its gigantic members, finally bursts forth in the fast and feverish whirl of its countless working organs. There were mules and steam-engines before there were any workers exclusively occupied in making mules and steam-engines, in the same way as men wore clothes before there were any tailors. However the inventions of Vaucanson, Arkwright, Watt and others could be put into practice only because each inventor found a considerable number of skilled mechanical workers available, placed at their disposal by the period of manufacture. Some of these workers were independent handicraftsmen of various trades, others were grouped together in manufactures, in which, as we have mentioned before, a division of labour of particular strictness prevailed. As inventions increased in number, and the demand for the newly discovered machines grew larger, the machine-making industry increasingly split up into numerous independent branches, and the division of labour within these manufactures developed accordingly. Here, therefore in manufacture, we see the immediate technical foundation of large-scale industry. Manufacture produced the machinery with which large-scale industry abolished the handicraft and manufacturing systems in the spheres of production it first seized hold of. The system of machine production therefore grew spontaneously on a material basis which was inadequate to it. When the system had attained a certain degree of development, it had to overthrow this ready-made foundation, which had meanwhile undergone further development in its old form, and create for itself a new basis appropriate to its own mode of production. Just as the individual machine retains a dwarf-like character as long as it is worked by the power of man alone, and just as no system of machinery could be properly developed before the steam-engine took the place of the earlier motive powers, animals, wind and even water; so too large-scale industry was crippled in its whole development as long as its characteristic instrument of production, the machine, owed its existence to personal strength and personal skill, and depended on the muscular development, the keenness of sight and the manual dexterity with which the specialized workers, in manufacture, and the handicraftsmen outside manufacture, wielded their dwarf-like implements. Thus apart from the high cost of machines made in this way – a circumstance which forms the dominant motive for the capitalist’s actions – the expansion of industries carried on by means of machinery and the invasion of fresh branches of production by machinery were dependent on the growth of a class of workers who, owing to the semi-artistic nature of their employment, could increase their numbers only gradually, and not by leaps and bounds. But, besides this, at a certain stage of its development large-scale industry also came into conflict with the technical basis provided for it by handicrafts and manufacture. A number of technical problems arose naturally and spontaneously from the very course of development: the size of the prime movers, of the transmitting mechanism and of the machines properly so called increased, the components of the machines became more complicated and diverse in form, they had to operate with stricter regularity, and they accordingly diverged more and more from the model which originally determined their construction under the handicraft system, and acquired an independent form restricted only by their mechanical task. At the same time the automatic system was perfected, and it became more and more unavoidable to use materials which were difficult to work with, as for instance when iron replaced wood. In every case the solution of these problems met with a stumbling-block in the personal restrictions which even the collective worker of manufacture could not break through except to a limited extent. Such machines as the modern hydraulic press, the modern power-loom and the modern carding engine could never have been furnished by the manufacturing period. The transformation of the mode of production in one sphere of industry necessitates a similar transformation in other spheres. This happens at first in branches of industry which are connected together by being separate phases of a process, and yet isolated by the social division of labour, in such a way that each of them produces an independent commodity. Thus machine spinning made machine weaving necessary, and both together made a mechanical and chemical revolution compulsory in bleaching, printing and dyeing. So too, on the other hand, the revolution in cotton-spinning called forth the invention of the gin, for separating the seeds from the cotton fibre; it was only by means of this invention that the production of cotton became possible on the enormous scale at present required. But as well as this, the revolution in the modes of production of industry and agriculture made necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social process of production, i.e. in the means of communication and transport. In a society whose pivot, to use Fourier’s expression,* was small-scale agriculture, with its subsidiary domestic industries and urban handicrafts, the means of communication and transport were so utterly inadequate to the needs of production in the period of manufacture, with its extended division of social labour, its concentration of instruments of labour and workers and its colonial markets, that they in fact became revolutionized. In the same way the means of communication and transport handed down from the period of manufacture soon became unbearable fetters on large-scale industry, given the feverish velocity with which it produces, its enormous extent, its constant flinging of capital and labour from one sphere of production into another and its newly created connections with the world market. Hence, quite apart from the immense transformation which took place in shipbuilding, the means of communication and transport gradually adapted themselves to the mode of production of large-scale industry by means of a system of river steamers, railways, ocean steamers and telegraphs. But the huge masses of iron that had now to be forged, welded, cut, bored and shaped required for their part machines of Cyclopean dimensions, which the machine-building trades of the period of manufacture were incapable of constructing. Large-scale industry therefore had to take over the machine itself, its own characteristic instrument of production, and to produce machines by means of machines. It was not till it did this that it could create for itself an adequate technical foundation, and stand on its own feet. At the same time as machine production was becoming more general, in the first decades of the nineteenth century, it gradually took over the construction of the machines themselves. But it is only during the last few decades that the construction of railways and ocean steamers on a vast scale has called into existence the Cyclopean machines now employed in the construction of prime movers. The most essential condition for the production of machines by machines was a prime mover capable of exerting any amount of force, while retaining perfect control. The steam-engine already fulfilled this condition. But at the same time it was necessary to produce the geometrically accurate straight lines, planes, circles, cylinders, cones and spheres for the individual parts of the machines. Henry Maudslay solved this problem in the first decade of the nineteenth century by the invention of the slide-rest, a tool that was soon made automatic, and was applied in a modified form to other machines for constructing machinery besides the lathe, for which it was originally intended. This mechanical appliance replaces not some particular tool but the hand itself, which produces a given form by holding and guiding the cutting tool along the iron or other material of labour. Thus it became possible to produce the geometrical shapes of the individual parts of machinery ‘with a degree of ease, accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated experience of the hand of the most skilled workman could give’. If we now look at the part of the machinery which is employed in the construction of machines, and forms the actual operating tool, we find that the manual implements re-appear, but on a Cyclopean scale. The operating part of the boring machine is an immense drill driven by a steam-engine; without this machine, on the other hand, the cylinders of large steam-engines and of hydraulic presses could not be made. The mechanical lathe is only a Cyclopean reproduction of the ordinary foot-lathe; the planing machine is an iron carpenter that works on iron with the same tools as the human carpenter employs on wood; the instrument that cuts the veneers on the London wharves is a gigantic razor; the tool of the shearing machine, which shears iron as easily as a tailor’s scissors cut cloth, is a monster pair of scissors; and the steam-hammer works with an ordinary hammer head, but of such a weight that even Thor himself could not wield it. These steam-hammers are an invention of Nasmyth, and there is one that weighs over 6 tons and strikes with a vertical fall of 7 feet, on an anvil weighing 36 tons. It is mere child’s play for it to crush a block of granite into powder, yet it is no less capable of driving a nail into a piece of soft wood with a succession of light taps. As machinery, the instrument of labour assumes a material mode of existence which necessitates the replacement of human force by natural forces, and the replacement of the rule of thumb by the conscious application of natural science. In manufacture the organization of the social labour process is purely subjective: it is a combination of specialized workers. Large-scale industry, on the other hand, possesses in the machine system an entirely objective organization of production, which confronts the worker as a pre-existing material condition of production. In simple cooperation, and even in the more specialized form based on the division of labour, the extrusion of the isolated worker by the associated worker still appears to be more or less accidental. Machinery, with a few exceptions to be mentioned later, operates only by means of associated labour, or labour in common. Hence the co-operative character of the labour process is in this case a technical necessity dictated by the very nature of the instrument of labour. 2. THE VALUE TRANSFERRED BY THE MACHINERY TO THE PRODUCT      We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-operation and the division of labour cost capital nothing. They are natural forces of social labour. Other natural forces appropriated to productive processes, such as steam, water, etc., also cost nothing. But just as a man requires lungs to breathe with, so he requires something that is the work of human hands in order to consume the forces of nature productively. A water-wheel is necessary to exploit the force of water, and a steam-engine to exploit the elasticity of steam. Once discovered, the law of the deflection of a magnetic needle in the field of an electric current, or the law of the magnetization of iron by electricity, cost absolutely nothing. But the exploitation of these laws for the purposes of telegraphy, etc., necessitates costly and extensive apparatus. As we have seen, the machine does not drive out the tool. Rather does the tool expand and multiply, changing from a dwarf implement of the human organism to the implement of a mechanism created by man. Capital now sets the worker to work, not with a manual tool, but with a machine which itself handles the tools. Therefore, although it is clear at the first glance that large-scale industry raises the productivity of labour to an extraordinary degree by incorporating into the production process both the immense forces of nature and the results arrived at by natural science, it is by no means equally clear that this increase in productive force is not, on the other hand, purchased with an increase in the amount of labour expended. Machinery, like every other component of constant capital, creates no new value, but yields up its own value to the product it serves to beget. In so far as the machine has value and, as a result, transfers value to the product, it forms an element in the value of the latter. Instead of being cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to the value of the machine. And it is crystal clear that machines and systems of machinery, large-scale industry’s characteristic instruments of labour, are incomparably more loaded with value than the implements used in handicrafts and in manufacture. In the first place, it must be observed that machinery, while always entering as a whole into the labour process, enters only piece by piece into the process of valorization. It never adds more value than it loses, on an average, by depreciation. Hence there is a great difference between the value of a machine and the value transferred in a given time by the machine to the product. Equally, there is a great difference between the machine as a factor in the formation of value and as a factor in the formation of the product. The longer the period during which the machine serves in the same labour process, the greater are those differences. It is no doubt true, as we have seen, that every instrument of labour enters as a whole into the labour process, while only piecemeal, in proportion to its average daily depreciation, into the process of valorization. But this difference between the mere utilization of the instrument and its depreciation is much greater in the case of machinery than it is with a tool, because the machine, being made from more durable material, has a longer life; because it can be employed more economically, from the point of view both of the deterioration of its own components and of its consumption of materials, as its use is regulated by strict scientific laws; and, finally, because its field of production is incomparably larger than that of a tool. Both in the case of the machine and of the tool, we find that after allowing for their average daily cost, that is for the value they transmit to the product by their average daily wear and tear, and for their consumption of auxiliary substances such as oil, coal and so on, they do their work for nothing, like the natural forces which are already available without the intervention of human labour. The greater the productive effectiveness of the machinery compared with that of the tool, the greater is the extent of its gratuitous service. Only in large-scale industry has man succeeded in making the product of his past labour, labour which has already been objectified, perform gratuitous service on a large scale, like a force of nature. When we considered co-operation and manufacture, we found that certain general conditions of production such as buildings could be consumed more economically than the scattered conditions of production of isolated craftsmen, because they could be consumed in common, and that they therefore made the product cheaper. In a system of machinery, not only is the framework of the machine consumed in common by its numerous working parts, but the prime mover, together with a part of the transmitting mechanism, is consumed in common by a large number of operating machines. Given the difference between the value of the machinery and the value transferred by it in a day to the product, the extent to which this latter value makes the product dearer depends in the first instance upon the size of the product, on its area, so to speak. Mr Baynes of Blackburn, in a lecture of 1857, estimates that ‘each real mechanical horse-power will drive 450 self-acting mule spindles, with preparation, or 220 throstle spindles, or 15 looms for 40-inch cloth with the appliances for warping, sizing, etc.’* In the first case, it is the daily product of 450 mule spindles, in the second, of 200 throstle spindles, and in the third, of 15 power-looms, over which is spread the daily cost of one horse-power and the deterioration of the machinery set in motion by that power. Hence this deterioration transfers only a minute amount of value to a pound of yarn or a yard of cloth. Similarly with the steam-hammer mentioned earlier. Since its daily deterioration, its consumption of coal, etc. are spread over the immense masses of iron hammered by it in a day, only a small value is added to a hundredweight of iron; but that value would be very great if the Cyclopean instrument were used to drive in small nails. Given a machine’s capacity for work, that is, the number of its operating tools or, where it is a question of force, their size, the amount of its product will depend on the velocity of its working parts, on the speed, for instance, of the spindles, or on the number of blows given by the hammer in a minute. Many of these colossal hammers strike seventy times in a minute, and Ryder’s patent machine for forging spindles with small hammers gives as many as 700 strokes per minute. Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the product, the amount of value so transferred depends on the total value of the machinery. The less labour it contains, the less value it contributes to the product. The less value it gives up, the more productive it is, and the more its services approach those rendered by natural forces. But the production of machinery lessens its value in relation to its extension and efficacy. A comparative analysis of the prices of commodities produced by handicrafts or manufacture, and of the prices of the same commodities produced by machinery, shows in general that in the product of machinery the value arising out of the instrument of labour increases relatively, but decreases absolutely. In other words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount in relation to the total value of the product-of a pound of yarn, for instance-increases. It is evident that whenever it costs as much labour to produce a machine as is saved by the employment of that machine, all that has taken place is a displacement of labour. Consequently, the total labour required to produce a commodity has not been lessened, in other words, the productivity of labour has not been increased. However, the difference between the labour a machine costs and the labour it saves, in other words the degree of productivity the machine possesses, does not depend on the difference between its own value and the value of the tool it replaces. As long as the labour spent on a machine is such that the portion of its value added to the product remains smaller than the value added by the worker to the product with his tool, there is always a difference of labour saved in favour of the machine. The productivity of the machine is therefore measured by the human labour-power it replaces. According to Mr Baynes, 2 1/ workers are required for the 450 mule spindles, including preparation machinery, that are driven by one horse-power28; each self-acting mule spindle, working 10 hours, produces 13 ounces of yarn (average thickness); consequently 2 1/ workers spin 3655/ lb. of yarn per week. Hence, if we disregard waste to make the calculation simpler, 366 lb. of cotton absorb only 150 hours of labour during their conversion into yarn, in other words 15 working days of 10 hours each. But with a spinning-wheel, assuming that the hand-spinner produces 13 ounces of yarn in 60 hours, the same weight of cotton would absorb 2, working days of 10 hours each, or 27, hours of labour. Where block-printing, the old method of printing calico by hand, has been driven out by machine-printing, a single machine, with the aid of one man or boy, prints as much calico of four colours in one hour as it formerly took 200 men to do. Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin in 1793, the separation of the seed from a pound of cotton cost an average day’s labour. By means of his invention it became possible for one black woman to clean 100 lb. a day, and since then the effectiveness of the gin has been increased considerably. A pound of raw cotton which previously cost 50 cents to produce could subsequently be sold for 10 cents at a greater profit, i.e. with more unpaid labour. In India they use an instrument called a churka, which is half machine and half tool, for separating the seeds from the cotton wool; with this one man and one woman can clean 28 lb. a day. With the churka invented some years ago by Dr Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250 lb. a day. If oxen, steam or water are used for driving it, only a few boys and girls are required, as feeders (providers of material for the machine). Sixteen of these machines driven by oxen do as much work in a day as 750 people did before, on average. As already stated,* a steam-plough does as much work in one hour at a cost of 3d. as 66 men at a cost of 15s. I come back to this example in order to clear up an erroneous notion. The 15s. are by no means the expression in money of all the labour expended in one hour by the 66 men. If the ratio of surplus labour to necessary labour were 100 per cent, these 66 men would produce in one hour a value of 30s., although their wages, 15s., represented only their labour for half an hour. Let us suppose, then, that a machine costs as much as the wages for a year of the 150 men it displaces, say £3,000; this £3, is by no means the expression in money of the labour provided by these men and added to the object of labour before the introduction of the machine, but only the expression of that portion of their year’s labour which was expended for themselves and is represented by their wages. On the other hand, the £3,000, the monetary value of the machine, expresses all the labour expended to produce it, whatever the proportion between the worker’s wages and the capitalist’s surplus-value. Therefore, even if the machine costs as much as the labour-power displaced by it, the labour objectified in it is still much smaller in quantity than the living labour it replaces. The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapening the product is limited by the requirement that less labour must be expended in producing the machinery than is displaced by the employment of that machinery. For the capitalist, however, there is a further limit on its use. Instead of paying for the labour, he pays only the value of the labour-power employed; the limit to his using a machine is therefore fixed by the difference between the value of the machine and the value of the labour-power replaced by it. Since the division of the day’s work into necessary labour and surplus labour differs in different countries, and even in the same country at different periods, or in different branches of industry; and further, since the actual wage of the worker sometimes sinks below the value of his labour-power, and sometimes rises above it, it is possible for the difference between the price of the machinery and the price of the labour-power replaced by that machinery to undergo great variations, while the difference between the quantity of labour needed to produce the machine and the total quantity of labour replaced by it remains constant. But it is only the former difference that determines the cost to the capitalist of producing a commodity, and influences his actions through the pressure of competition. Hence the invention nowadays in England of machines that are employed only in North America; just as in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries machines were invented in Germany for use exclusively in Holland, and just as many French inventions of the eighteenth century were exploited only in England. In the older countries, machinery itself, when employed in some branches of industry, creates such a superfluity of labour (‘redundancy of labour’ is how Ricardo puts it*) in other branches that the fall of wages below the value of labour-power impedes the use of machinery in those other branches and, from the standpoint of the capitalist, makes the use of machinery superfluous, and often impossible, because his profit comes from a reduction in the labour paid for, not in the labour employed. In some branches of the wool industry in England the employment of children has been considerably lessened during recent years, and in some cases entirely abolished. Why? Because the Factory Acts made two sets of children necessary, one set working six hours, the other four, or both sets working five hours. But the parents refused to sell the ‘half-timers’ cheaper than the ‘full-timers’. Hence the substitution of machinery for the ‘half-timers’. Before the labour of women and children under 10 years old was forbidden in mines, the capitalists considered the employment of naked women and girls, often in company with men, so far sanctioned by their moral code, and especially by their ledgers, that it was only after the passing of the Act that they had recourse to machinery. The Yankees have invented a stone-breaking machine. The English do not make use of it because the ‘wretch’ who does this work gets paid for such a small portion of his labour that machinery would increase the cost of production to the capitalist. In England women are still occasionally used instead of horses for hauling barges, because the labour required to produce horses and machines is an accurately known quantity, while that required to maintain the women of the surplus population is beneath all calculation. Hence we nowhere find a more shameless squandering of human labour-power for despicable purposes than in England, the land of machinery. 3. THE MOST IMMEDIATE EFFECTS OF MACHINE PRODUCTION ON THE WORKER      As we have shown, the starting-point of large-scale industry is the revolution in the instruments of labour, and this attains its most highly developed form in the organized system of machinery in the factory. Before we inquire how human material is incorporated with this objective organism, let us consider some general effects of the revolution on the worker himself. (a) Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-Power by Capital. The Employment of Women and Children      In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it becomes a means for employing workers of slight muscular strength, or whose bodily development is incomplete, but whose limbs are all the more supple. The labour of women and children was therefore the first result of the capitalist application of machinery! That mighty substitute for labour and for workers, the machine, was immediately transformed into a means for increasing the number of wage-labourers by enrolling, under the direct sway of capital, every member of the worker’s family, without distinction of age or sex. Compulsory work for the capitalist usurped the place, not only of the children’s play, but also of independent labour at home, within customary limits, for the family itself. The value of labour-power was determined, not only by the labour-time necessary to maintain the individual adult worker, but also by that necessary to maintain his family. Machinery, by throwing every member of that family onto the labour-market, spreads the value of the man’s labour-power over his whole family. It thus depreciates it. To purchase the labour-power of a family of four workers may perhaps cost more than it formerly did to purchase the labour-power of the head of the family, but, in return, four days’ labour takes the place of one day’s, and the price falls in proportion to the excess of the surplus labour of four over the surplus labour of one. In order that the family may live, four people must now provide not only labour for the capitalist, but also surplus labour. Thus we see that machinery, while augmenting the human material that forms capital’s most characteristic field of exploitation, at the same time raises the degree of that exploitation. Machinery also revolutionizes, and quite fundamentally, the agency through which the capital-relation is formally mediated, i.e. the contract between the worker and the capitalist. Taking the exchange of commodities as our basis, our first assumption was that the capitalist and the worker confronted each other as free persons, as independent owners of commodities, the one possessing money and the means of production, the other labour-power. But now the capitalist buys children and young persons. Previously the worker sold his own labour-power, which he disposed of as a free agent, formally speaking. Now he sells wife and child. He has become a slave-dealer. Notices of demand for children’s labour often resemble in form the inquiries for Negro slaves that were formerly to be read among the advertisements in American journals. ‘My attention,’ says an English factory inspector, ‘was drawn to an advertisement in the local paper of one of the most important manufacturing towns of my district, of which the following is a copy: “Wanted, 12 to 20 young persons, not younger than what can pass for 13 years. Wages, 4 shillings a week. Apply, etc.”’ The phrase ‘what can pass for 13 years’ refers to the fact that, according to the Factory Act, children under 13 years old may only work 6 hours a day. An officially appointed doctor (the ‘certifying surgeon’) must certify their age. The manufacturer, therefore, asks for children who look as if they are already 13 years old. The decrease, often by leaps and bounds, in the number of children under 13 years employed in factories, a decrease that is shown in an astonishing manner by the English statistics of the last twenty years, was for the most part, according to the evidence of the factory inspectors themselves, the work of the certifying surgeons, who adjusted the children’s ages in a manner appropriate to the capitalist’s greed for exploitation and the parents’ need to engage in this traffic. In the notorious London district of Bethnal Green a public market is held every Monday and Tuesday morning, at which children of both sexes, from 9 years of age upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufacturers. ‘The usual terms are 1s. 8d. a week (this belongs to the parents) and “2d. for myself and tea”. The Contract is binding only for the week. The scene and language while this market is going on are quite disgraceful.’ It still happens in England that women ‘take children from the workhouse and let any one have them out for 2s. 6d. a week’. In spite of legislation, the number of boys sold in Great Britain by their parents to act as live chimney-sweeping machines (although machines exist to replace them) is at least 2,000. The revolution effected by machinery in the legal relationship between buyer and seller of labour-power, causing the transaction as a whole to lose the appearance of a contract between free persons, later offered the English Parliament an excuse, founded on juristic principles, for state intervention into factory affairs. Whenever the law limits the labour of children to 6 hours in industries not previously touched, the complaints of the manufacturers resound yet again. They allege that numbers of parents withdraw their children from the industries brought under the Act in order to sell them where ‘freedom of labour’ still prevails, i.e. where children under 13 years are compelled to work like adults, and for that reason can be sold at a higher price. But since capital is by its nature a leveller, since it insists upon equality in the conditions of exploitation of labour in every sphere of production as its own innate right, the limitation by law of children’s labour in one branch of industry results in its limitation in others. We have already alluded to the physical deterioration of the children and young persons, as well as the women, whom machinery subjects to the exploitation of capital, first directly in the factories that sprout forth on the basis of machinery, and then indirectly in all the remaining branches of industry. Here we shall dwell on one point only, the enormous mortality of the children of the workers during the first few years of their life. In 16 of the registration districts into which England is divided, there are, for every 100, children alive under the age of one year, only 9, deaths in a year on an average (in one district only 7,047); in 24 districts the deaths are over 10, but under 11,000, in 39 districts over 11, but under 12,000; in 48 districts over 12, but under 13,000; in 22 districts over 20,000; in 25 districts over 21,000; in 17 over 22,000; in 11 over 23,000; in Hoo, Wolver-hampton, Ashton-under-Lyne and Preston, over 24,000; in Nottingham, Stockport and Bradford, over 25,000; in Wisbeach, 26,000; and in Manchester, 26,125. As was shown by an official medical inquiry in the year 1861, the high death-rates are, apart from local causes, principally due to the employment of the mothers away from their homes, and to the neglect and maltreatment arising from their absence, which consists in such things as insufficient nourishment, unsuitable food and dosing with opiates; besides this, there arises an unnatural estrangement between mother and child, and as a consequence intentional starving and poisoning of the children. In those agricultural districts ‘where a minimum in the employment of women exists, the death-rate is on the other hand very low’. However, the 1861 Commission of Inquiry arrived at the unexpected conclusion that in some purely agricultural districts bordering on the North Sea, the death-rate of children under one year old almost equalled that of the worst factory districts. Dr Julian Hunter was therefore commissioned to investigate this phenomenon on the spot. His report is incorporated into the Sixth Report on Public Health Up to that time it was supposed that the children were decimated by malaria, and other diseases peculiar to low-lying and marshy districts. But the inquiry showed the very opposite, namely ‘that the same cause which drove away malaria, the conversion of the land from a morass in winter and a scanty pasture in summer into fruitful corn land, created the exceptional death-rate of the infants’. The seventy medical men whom Dr Hunter examined in those districts were ‘wonderfully in accord’ on this point. In fact, the revolution in cultivation had led to the introduction of the industrial system. ‘Married women, who work in gangs along with boys and girls, are, for a stipulated sum of money, placed at the disposal of the farmer by a man called the “undertaker”, who contracts for the whole gang. These gangs will sometimes travel many miles from their own village; they are to be met morning and evening on the roads, dressed in short petticoats, with suitable coats and boots, and sometimes trousers, looking wonderfully strong and healthy, but tainted with a customary immorality and heedless of the fatal results which their love of this busy and independent life is bringing on their unfortunate offspring who are pining at home.’ All the phenomena of the factory districts are reproduced here, including a yet higher degree of disguised infanticide and stupefaction of children with opiates. ‘My knowledge of such evils,’ says Dr Simon, the medical officer of the Privy Council and editor-in-chief of the Reports on Public Health,’ may excuse the profound misgiving with which I regard any large industrial employment of adult women.’ ‘Happy indeed’, exclaims Mr Baker, the factory inspector, in his official report, ‘happy indeed will it be for the manufacturing districts of England, when every married woman having a family is prohibited from working in any textile works at all.’    The moral degradation which arises out of the exploitation by capitalism of the labour of women and children has been so exhaustively presented by F. Engels in his Condition of the Working Class in England, and by other writers too, that a mere mention will suffice here. But the intellectual degeneration artificially produced by transforming immature human beings into mere machines for the production of surplus-value (and there is a very clear distinction between this and the state of natural ignorance in which the mind lies fallow without losing its capacity for development, its natural fertility) finally compelled even the English Parliament to make elementary education a legal requirement before children under 14 years could be consumed ‘productively’ by being employed in those industries which are subject to the Factory Acts. The spirit of capitalist production emerges clearly from the ludicrous way the so-called education clauses of the Factory Acts have been drawn up, from the absence of any administrative machinery, whereby this compulsory education is once again made for the most part illusory, from the opposition of the manufacturers themselves to these education clauses, and from the tricks and dodges they use to evade them. ‘For this the legislature is alone to blame, by having passed a delusive law, which, while it would seem to provide that the children employed in factories shall be educated, contains no enactment by which that professed end can be secured. It provides nothing more than that the children shall on certain days of the week, and for a certain number of hours (three) in each day, be inclosed within the four walls of a place called a school, and that the employer of the child shall receive weekly a certificate to that effect signed by a person designated by the subscriber as a schoolmaster or schoolmistress.’ Before the passing of the amended Factory Act of 1844, it happened not infrequently that the certificates of attendance at school were signed by the schoolmaster or schoolmistress with a cross, as they themselves were unable to write. ‘On one occasion, on visiting a place called a school, from which certificates of school attendance had issued, I was so struck with the ignorance of the master, that I said to him: “Pray, sir, can you read?” His reply was “Aye, summat!” and as a justification of his right to grant certificates, he added: “At any rate, I am before my scholars.” ’ The inspectors, when the Bill of 1844 was in preparation, did not fail to denounce the disgraceful state of the places called schools, certificates from which they were obliged to admit as a compliance with the laws, but they were successful only in obtaining this, that since the passing of the Act of 1844, ‘the figures in the school certificate must be filled up in the handwriting of the schoolmaster, who must also sign his Christian and surname in full’. Sir John Kincaid, factory inspector for Scotland, relates similar official experiences. ‘The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs Ann Killin. Upon asking her to spell her name, she straightway made a mistake, by beginning with the letter C, but correcting herself immediately, she said her name began with a K. On looking at her signature, however, in the school certificate books. I noticed that she spelt it in various ways, while her handwriting left no doubt as to her unfitness to teach. She herself also acknowledged that she could not keep the register… In a second school I found the schoolroom 15 feet long, and 10 feet wide, and counted in this space 75 children, who were gabbling something unintelligible.’ ‘But it is not only in the miserable places above referred to that the children obtain certificates of school attendance without having received instruction of any value, for in many schools where there is a competent teacher, his efforts are of little avail from the distracting crowd of children of all ages, from infants of 3 years old and upwards; his livelihood, miserable at the best, depending on the pence received from the greatest number of children whom it is possible to cram into the space. To this is to be added scanty school furniture, deficiency of books, and other materials for teaching, and the depressing effect upon the poor children themselves of a close, noisome atmosphere. I have been in many such schools, where I have seen rows of children doing absolutely nothing; and this is certified as school attendance, and, in statistical returns, such children are set down as being educated.’ In Scotland the manufacturers do their best to exclude from employment the children who are obliged to attend school. ‘It requires no further argument to prove that the educational clauses of the Factory Act, being held in such disfavour among mill-owners, tend in a great measure to exclude that class of children alike from the employment and the benefit of education contemplated by this Act.’ This situation appears at its most grotesque and repulsive in calico print works, which are regulated by a special Act. * This Act lays it down that ‘every child, before being employed in a print works, must have attended school for at least 30 days, and not less than 150 hours, during the six months immediately preceding such first day of employment, and during the continuance of its employment in the print works, it must attend for a like period of 30 days, and 150 hours during every successive period of six months… The attendance at School must be between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. No attendance of less than 2 1/ hours, nor more than 5 hours on any one day, shall be reckoned as part of the 150 hours. Under ordinary circumstances the children attend school morning and afternoon for 30 days, for at least 5 hours each day, and upon the expiration of the 30 days, the statutory total of 150 hours having been attained, having, in their language, made up their book, they return to the print works, where they continue until the six months have expired, when another instalment of school attendance becomes due, and they again seek the school until the book is again made up… Many boys having attended school for the required number of hours, when they return to school after the expiration of their six months’ work in the print works, are in the same condition as when they first attended school as print-work boys, [and I have been assured] that they have lost all they gained by their previous school attendance… In other print works the children’s attendance at school is made to depend altogether upon the exigencies of the work in the establishment. The requisite number of hours is made up each six months, by instalments consisting of from 3 to 5 hours at a time, spreading over, perhaps, the whole six months… For instance, the attendance on one day might be from 8 to 11 a.m., on another day from 1 p.m. to 4 p.m., and the child might not appear at school again for several days, when it would attend from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.; then it might attend for 3 or 4 days consecutively, or for a week, then it would not appear in school for 3 weeks or a month, after that upon some odd days at some odd hours when the operative who employed it chose to spare it; and thus the child was, as it were, buffeted from school to work, from work to school, until the tale of 150 hours was told.’    Machinery, by this excessive addition of women and children to the working personnel, at last breaks the resistance which the male workers had continued to oppose to the despotism of capital throughout the period of manufacture. (b) The Prolongation of the Working Day      If machinery is the most powerful means of raising the productivity of labour, i.e. of shortening the working time needed to produce a commodity, it is also, as a repository of capital, the most powerful means of lengthening the working day beyond all natural limits in those industries first directly seized on by it. It creates, on the one hand, new conditions which permit capital to give free rein to this tendency, and on the other hand, new incentives which whet its insatiable appetite for the labour of others. In the first place, in machinery the motion and the activity of the instrument of labour asserts its independence vis-à-vis the worker. The instrument of labour now becomes an industrial form of perpetual motion. It would go on producing for ever, if it did not come up against certain natural limits in the shape of the weak bodies and the strong wills of its human assistants. Because it is capital, the automatic mechanism is endowed, in the person of the capitalist, with consciousness and a will. As capital, therefore, it is animated by the drive to reduce to a minimum the resistance offered by man, that obstinate yet elastic natural barrier. This resistance is moreover lessened by the apparently undemanding nature of work at a machine, and the more pliant and docile character of the women and children employed by preference. The productivity of machinery is, as we saw, inversely proportional to the value transferred by it to the product. The longer the period during which it functions, the greater is the mass of the products over which the value transmitted by the machine is spread, and the smaller is the portion of that value added to each single commodity. The active lifetime of a machine, however, is clearly dependent on the length of the working day, or the duration of the daily labour process multiplied by the number of days for which the process is carried on. The amount of deterioration suffered by a machine does not by any means exactly correspond to the length of time it has been in use. And even if it were so, a machine working 16 hours a day for 7 1/ years covers as long a working period as the same machine working only 8 hours a day for 15 years and transmits to the total product no more value. Notwithstanding this, the value of the machine would be reproduced twice as quickly in the first case as in the second, and the capitalist, using the same machine, would absorb in 7 1/ years as much surplus-value as he would in 15 in the second case. The physical deterioration of the machine is of two kinds. The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the other from lack of use, as a sword rusts when left in its scabbard. This second kind is its consumption by the elements. Deterioration of the first kind is more or less directly proportional, and that of the second kind to a certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the machine. But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine also undergoes what we might call a moral depreciation. It loses exchange-value, either because machines of the same sort are being produced more cheaply than it was, or because better machines are entering into competition with it. In both cases, however young and full of life the machine may be, its value is no longer determined by the necessary labour-time actually objectified in it, but by the labour-time necessary to reproduce either it or the better machine. It has therefore been devalued to a greater or lesser extent. The shorter the period taken to reproduce its total value, the less is the danger of moral depreciation; and the longer the working day, the shorter that period in fact is. When machinery is first introduced into a particular branch of production, new methods of reproducing it more cheaply follow blow upon blow, and so do improvements which relate not only to individual parts and details of the machine, but also to its whole construction. It is therefore in the early days of a machine’s life that this special incentive to the prolongation of the working day makes itself felt most acutely. Given the length of the working day, and in otherwise identical circumstances, the exploitation of double the number of workers requires not only a doubling of that part of constant capital which is invested in machinery and buildings, but also a doubling of the part laid out in raw material and auxiliary substances. The lengthening of the working day, on the other hand, permits an expansion of the scale of production without any change in the amount of capital invested in machinery and buildings. Not only does surplus-value increase therefore, but the outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes. It is true that this takes place, more or less, with every lengthening of the working day; but here the change is of far greater importance because the part of the capital that has been converted into the instruments of labour now falls more decisively into the balance. The development of machine production ties a constantly increasing portion of the capital to a form in which, on the one hand, it is constantly capable of valorization, and in which, on the other hand, it loses both use-value and exchange-value whenever it is deprived of contact with living labour. Mr Ashworth, an English cotton magnate, imparted the following lesson to Professor Nassau W. Senior: ‘When a labourer lays down his spade, he renders useless, for that period, a capital worth eighteen-pence. When one of our people leaves the mill, he renders useless a capital that has cost £100,000.’ Just imagine that! Making ‘useless’, if only for a single moment, a piece of capital that has cost £100,000! It is in truth monstrous that a single one of our people should ever leave the factory! The increased use of machinery, as Senior now realizes, having been instructed by Mr Ashworth, makes a constantly increased prolongation of the working day ‘desirable’. Machinery produces relative surplus-value, not only by directly reducing the value of labour-power, and indirectly cheapening it by cheapening the commodities that enter into its reproduction, but also, when it is first introduced sporadically into an industry, by converting the labour employed by the owner of that machinery into labour of a higher degree, by raising the social value of the article produced above its individual value, and thus enabling the capitalist to replace the value of a day’s labour-power by a smaller portion of the value of a day’s product. During this transitional period, while the use of machinery remains a sort of monopoly, profits are exceptional, and the capitalist endeavours to exploit thoroughly ‘the sunny time of this his first love’ by prolonging the working day as far as possible. The magnitude of the profit gives him an insatiable hunger for yet more profit. As machinery comes into general use in a particular branch of production, the social value of the machine’s product sinks down to its individual value, and the following law asserts itself: surplus-value does not arise from the labour-power that has been replaced by the machinery, but from the labour-power actually employed in working with the machinery. Surplus-value arises only from the variable part of capital, and we saw that the amount of surplus-value depends on two factors, namely the rate of surplus-value and the number of workers simultaneously employed. * Given the length of the working day, the rate of surplus-value is determined by the relative duration of the necessary labour and the surplus labour performed in the course of a working day. The number of workers simultaneously employed depends, for its part, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital. Now, however much the use of machinery may increase surplus labour at the expense of necessary labour by raising the productive power of labour, it is clear that it attains this result only by diminishing the number of workers employed by a given amount of capital. It converts a portion of capital which was previously variable, i.e. had been turned into living labour, into machinery, i.e. into constant capital which does not produce surplus-value. It is impossible, for instance, to squeeze as much surplus-value out of two as out of twenty-four workers. If each of these twenty-four men gives only 1 hour of surplus labour in 12, the twenty-four men give together 24 hours of surplus labour, while 24 hours is the total labour of the two men. Hence there is an immanent contradiction in the application of machinery to the production of surplus-value, since, of the two factors of the surplus-value created by a given amount of capital, one, the rate of surplus-value, cannot be increased except by diminishing the other, the number of workers. This contradiction comes to light as soon as machinery has come into general use in a given industry, for then the value of the machine-produced commodity regulates the social value of all commodities of the same kind; and it is this contradiction which in turn drives the capitalist, without his being aware of the fact, to the most ruthless and excessive prolongation of the working day, in order that he may secure compensation for the decrease in the relative number of workers exploited by increasing not only relative but also absolute surplus labour. The capitalist application of machinery on the one hand supplies new and powerful incentives for an unbounded prolongation of the working day, and produces such a revolution in the mode of labour as well as the character of the social working organism that it is able to break all resistance to this tendency. But on the other hand, partly by placing at the capitalists’ disposal new strata of the working class previously inaccessible to him, partly by setting free the workers it supplants, machinery produces a surplus working population, which is compelled to submitto the dictates of capital. Hence that remarkable phenomenon in the history of modern industry, that machinery sweeps away every moral and natural restriction on the length of the working day. Hence too the economic paradox that the most powerful instrument for reducing labour-time suffers a dialectical inversion and becomes the most unfailing means for turning the whole lifetime of the worker and his family into labour-time at capital’s disposal for its own valorization. ‘If’, dreamed Aristotle, the greatest thinker of antiquity, ‘if every tool, when summoned, or even by intelligent anticipation, could do the work that befits it, just as the creations of Daedalus moved of themselves, or the tripods of Hephaestus went of their own accord to their sacred work, if the weavers’ shuttles were to weave of themselves, then there would be no need either of apprentices for the master craftsmen, or of slaves for the lords.’ And Antipater,* a Greek poet of the time of Cicero, hailed the water-wheel for grinding corn, that most basic form of all productive machinery, as the liberator of female slaves and the restorer of the golden age. Oh those heathens! They understood nothing of political economy and Christianity, as the learned Bastiat discovered, and before him the still wiser MacCulloch. They did not, for example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of lengthening the working day. They may perhaps have excused the slavery of one person as a means to the full human development of another. But they lacked the specifically Christian qualities which would have enabled them to preach the slavery of the masses in order that a few crude and half-educated parvenus might become ‘eminent spinners’, ‘extensive sausage-makers’ and ‘influential shoe-black dealers’. (c) Intensification of Labour      As we have seen, the immoderate lengthening of the working day produced by machinery in the hands of capital leads later on to a reaction on the part of the society, which is threatened in the very sources of its life; and, from there, to a normal working day whose length is fixed by law. On the foundation laid by the latter, something we have already met with, namely the intensification of labour, develops into a phenomenon of decisive importance. Our analysis of absolute surplus-value dealt primarily with the extensive magnitude of labour, its duration, while its intensity was treated as a given factor. We have now to consider the inversion [Umschlag] of extensive magnitude into intensive magnitude, or magnitude of degree. It is self-evident that in proportion as the use of machinery spreads, and the experience of a special class of worker – the machine-worker – accumulates, the rapidity and thereby the intensity of labour undergoes a natural increase. Thus in England, in the course of half a century, the lengthening of the working day has gone hand in hand with an increase in the intensity of factory labour. Nevertheless, the reader will clearly see that we are dealing here, not with temporary paroxysms of labour but with labour repeated day after day with unvarying uniformity. Hence a point must inevitably be reached where extension of the working day and intensification of labour become mutually exclusive so that the lengthening of the working day becomes compatible only with a lower degree of intensity, and inversely, a higher degree of intensity only with a shortening of the working day. As soon as the gradual upsurge of working-class revolt had compelled Parliament compulsorily to shorten the hours of labour, and to begin by imposing a normal working day on factories properly so called, i.e. from the moment that it was made impossible once and for all to increase the production of surplus-value by prolonging the working day, capital threw itself with all its might, and in full awareness of the situation, into the production of relative surplus-value, by speeding up the development of the machine system. At the same time a change took place in the nature of relative surplus-value. In general, relative surplus-value is produced by raising the productivity of the worker, and thereby enabling him to produce more in a given time with the same expenditure of labour. The same amount of labour-time adds the same value as before to the total product, but this unchanged amount of exchange-value is spread over more use-values. Hence the value of each single commodity falls. But the situation changes with the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour. This gives an immense impetus to the development of productivity and the more economical use of the conditions of production. It imposes on the worker an increased expenditure of labour within a time which remains constant, a heightened tension of labour-power, and a closer filling-up of the pores of the working day, i.e. a condensation of labour, to a degree which can only be attained within the limits of the shortened working day. This compression of a greater mass of labour into a given period now counts for what it really is, namely an increase in the quantity of labour. In addition to the measure of its ‘extensive magnitude’, labour-time now acquires a measure of its intensity, or degree of density. The denser hour of the 10-hour working day contains more labour, i.e. expended labour-power, than the more porous hour of the 12-hour working day. Thus the product of one of the 10 hours has has as much value as the product of 1⅕⅕of the 12 hours, or even more. Apart from the increased yield of relative surplus-value which results from the heightened productivity of labour, the same mass of value is now produced for the capitalist by, say, 3 1/ 1/ hours of surplus labour and 6 2/ 2/ hours of necessary labour, as was previously produced by 4 hours of surplus labour and 8 hours of necessary labour. We now come to the question of how the labour is intensified. The first effect of shortening the working day results from the self-evident law that the efficiency of labour-power is in inverse ratio to the duration of its expenditure. Hence, within certain limits, what is lost by shortening the duration of labour is gained by increasing the degree of power exerted. Moreover, the capitalist ensures by his method of payment that the worker really does expend more labour-power. In manufactures like potteries, where machinery plays little or no part, the introduction of the Factory Act has strikingly shown that the mere shortening of the working day increases to a wonderful degree the regularity, uniformity, order, continuity and energy of labour. It seemed, however, doubtful whether this effect could be produced in the factory proper, because there the dependence of the worker on the continuous and uniform motion of the machinery had already created the strictest discipline. Hence, when in 1844 the reduction of the working day to less than twelve hours was being debated, the manufacturers declared almost unanimously ‘that their over lookers in the different rooms took good care that the hands lost no time’, that ‘the extent of vigilance and attention on the part of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased’, and therefore, assuming the speed of the machinery and other conditions remained constant, ‘to expect in a well-managed factory any important result from increased attention of the workmen was an absurdity’. This assertion was controverted by means of experiments. Mr Robert Gardner reduced the hours of work in his two large factories at Preston, on and after 20 April 1844, from 12 to 11 hours a day. The result of about a year on this system was that ‘the same amount of product for the same cost was received, and the workpeople as a whole earned in 11 hours as much wages as they did before in 12’. I shall pass over the experiments made in the spinning and carding rooms, because they were accompanied by an increase of 2 per cent in the speed of the machines. But in the weaving department, where moreover many sorts of figured fancy articles were woven, there was not the slightest alteration in the objective conditions of production. The result was: ‘From 6th January to 20th April 1844, with a 12 hours’ day, average weekly wages of each hand 10s. l 1/2d., from 20th April to 29th June 1844, with a day of 11 hours, average weekly wages 10s. 1/2d.’ Here we have more produced in 11 hours than previously in 12, entirely as a result of steather application to the work and a more economical use of time on the part of the workers. While they got the same wages and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist got the same amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas and other such items for one hour. Similar equally successful experiments were carried out in the mills of Messrs Horrocks and Jacson. The shortening of the working day creates, to begin with, the subjective condition for the condensation of labour, i.e. it makes it possible for the worker to set more labour-power in motion within a given time. As soon as that shortening becomes compulsory, machinery becomes in the hands of capital the objective means, systematically employed, for squeezing out more labour in a given time. This occurs in two ways: the speed of the machines is increased, and the same worker receives a greater quantity of machinery to supervise or operate. Improved construction of the machinery is necessary, partly to allow greater pressure to be put on the worker, partly because it is an inevitable concomitant of intensification of labour, since the legal limitation of the working day compels the capitalist to exercise the strictest economy in the cost of production. The improvements in the steam-engine have increased the piston speed and at the same time have made it possible, by means of a greater economy of power, to drive more machinery with the same engine, while consuming the same amount of coal, or even a smaller amount. The improvements in the transmitting mechanism have lessened friction and reduced the diameter and weight of the shafts to a constantly decreasing minimum, something which strikingly distinguishes modern machinery from the older type. Finally, the improvements in the operative machines have, while reducing their size, increased their speed and efficiency, as in the modern power-loom; or, while increasing the size of their frames, they have also increased the extent and number of their working parts, as in spinning-mules, or added to the speed of those working parts by imperceptible alterations of detail, such as those which ten years ago increased the speed of the spindles in self-acting mules by one-fifth. The reduction of the working day to 12 hours dates in England from 1832. In 1836 a manufacturer stated: ‘The labour now undergone in the factories is much greater than it used to be… compared with thirty or forty years ago… owing to the greater attention and activity required by the greatly increased speed which is given to the machinery.’ In the year 1844, Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in the House of Commons the following statements, which were supported by documentary evidence:    ‘The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such operations. Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that would demand the sinews of millions of men; but it has also prodigiously multiplied the labour of those who are governed by its fearful movements… In 1815, the labour of following a pair of mules spinning cotton of No. – reckoning 12 hours to the working day – involved a necessity of walking 8 miles. In 1832, the distance travelled in following a pair of mules, spinning cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and frequently more. In 1825 the spinner put up daily, on each of these mules, 208 stretches, making a total of 1, stretches in the course of the day. In 1832, the spinner put up on each mule 2, stretches, making a total of 4,400. In 1844, 2, stretches, making a total of 4,800; and in some cases the amount of labour required is even still greater… I have another document sent to me in 1842, stating that the labour is progressively increasing – increasing not only because the distance to be travelled is greater, but because the quantity of goods produced is multiplied, while the hands are fewer in proportion than before; and, moreover, because an inferior species of cotton is now often spun, which it is more difficult to work… In the carding-room there has also been a great increase of labour. One person there does the work formerly divided between two. In the weaving-room, where a vast number of persons are employed, and principally females… the labour has increased within the last few years fully 10 per cent, owing to the increased speed of the machinery in spinning. In 1838, the number of hanks spun per week was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. In 1819, the number of picks in power-loom weaving per minute was 60 – in 1842 it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour.’    In the face of this remarkable level of intensity, which labour had already reached in 1844 under the Twelve Hours’ Act, there appeared to be a justification for the assertion made at that time by the English manufacturers that any further progress in that direction was impossible, and therefore that any further reduction in the hours of labour would necessarily bring with it a drop in production. The apparent correctness of their reasoning will best be shown by the following contemporary statement by Leonard Horner, the factory inspector and tireless censor of the manufacturers. ‘Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regulated by the speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of the mill-owner to drive it at the utmost rate of speed consistent with these following conditions, viz., the preservation of the machinery from too rapid deterioration; the preservation of the quality of the article manufactured; and the capability of the workman to follow the motion without a greater exertion than he can sustain for a constancy. One of the most important problems, therefore, which the owner of a factory has to solve, is to find out the maximum speed at which he can run, with a due regard to the above conditions. It frequently happens that he finds he has gone too fast, that breakages and bad work more than counterbalance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slacken his pace. I therefore concluded, that as an active and intelligent mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would not be possible to produce as much in 11 hours as in 12. I further assumed that the operative paid by piece-work, would exert himself to the utmost consistent with the power of continuing at the same rate.’ Horner therefore came to the conclusion, despite the experiments of Gardner and others, that a further reduction of the working day below 12 hours would necessarily diminish the quantity of the product. He himself cited his opinion of 1845 ten years later in order to show how much at that time he still under-estimated the elasticity of machinery and of human labour-power, both of which are simultaneously stretched to their utmost by the compulsory shortening of the working day. We now come to the period following the introduction of the Ten Hours’ Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, silk and flax mills. ‘The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles 500, and upon mules 1, revolutions a minute, i.e. the speed of the throstle spindle, which in 1839 was 4, times a minute, is now’ (1862) ‘5,000; and of the mule spindle, that was 5,000, is now 6, times a minute, amounting in the former case to one-tenth; and in the second case to one-fifth additional increase.’ James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of Patricroft, near Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Homer, written in 1852, the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine made between the years 1848 and 1852. After remarking that the horse-power of steam-engines, being always estimated in the official returns according to the power of similar engines in 1828, is only nominal, and can serve only as an index of their real power, he goes on to say: ‘I am confident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent more duty or work performed on the average, and that in many cases the identical steam-engines which in the days of the restricted speed of 220 feet per minute, yielded 50 horse-power, are now yielding upwards of 100… The modern steam-engine of 100 horse-power is capable of being driven at a much greater force than formerly, arising from improvements in its construction, the capacity and construction of the boilers, etc…. Although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery.’ In the year 1850, the factories of the United Kingdom employed 134, nominal horse-power to move 25,638, spindles and 301, looms. The number of spindles and looms in 1856 was, respectively, 33,503, and 369,205, which, if we reckon the nominal horse-power required to move them to be the same as in 1850, would call for a total horse-power of 175,000. But according to the official return for 1856 the actual horse-power was 161,435, in other words over 10, horse-power less than the result arrived at by calculating on the basis of the return of 1850. ‘The facts thus brought out by the Return’ (of 1856) ‘appear to be that the factory system is increasing rapidly; that although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery; that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight of machinery by economy of force and other methods, and that an increased quantity of work can be turned off by improvements in machinery, and in methods of manufacture, by increase of speed of the machinery, and by a variety of other causes.’    ‘The great improvements made in machines of every kind have raised their productive power very much. Without any doubt, the shortening of the hours of labour… gave the impulse to these improvements. The latter, combined with the more intense strain on the workman, have had the effect that at least as much is produced in the shortened working day’ (shortened by two hours or one-sixth) ‘as was previously produced during the longer one.’    One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the manufacturers increased along with the more intensive exploitation of labour-power. From 1838 to 1850 the average annual increase in English cotton and other factories was 32, from 1850 to 1856 it was 86. *    But however great the progress of English industry had been during the eight years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence of a working day of 10 hours, it was far surpassed during the next period of six years from 1856 to 1862. In silk factories, for instance, there were 1,093, spindles in 1856, 1,388, spindles in 1862; 9, looms in 1856, 10, looms in 1862. The number of workers, however, was 56, in 1856 and 52, in 1862. The increase in spindles was therefore 26. per cent, and in looms 15. per cent, while the number of workers decreased by 7 per cent. In the year 1850, 875, spindles were used in worsted mills; in 1856 the figure was 1,324, (an increase of 51. per cent); and in 1862 it was 1,289, (a decrease of 2. per cent). But if we deduct the doubling spindles which figure in the total for 1856, but not in that for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the number of spindles remained nearly stationary. On the other hand, after 1850 the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases doubled. The number of power-looms in worsted mills was 32, in 1850, 38, in 1856, and 43, in 1862. The number of workers was 79, in 1850, 87, in 1856, and 86, in 1862. But the number of children under 14 years old included in these figures was 9, in 1850, 11, in 1856, and 13, in 1862. Thus in spite of the greatly increased number of looms in 1862, compared with 1856, the total number of workers employed decreased, and the number of children exploited increased. On the 27 April 1863, Mr Ferrand said in the House of Commons: ‘I have been informed by delegates from sixteen districts of Lancashire and Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, that the work in the factories is, in consequence of the improvements in machinery, constantly on the increase. Instead of as formerly one person with two helps tenting two looms, one person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no uncommon thing for one person to tent four. hours’ work, as is evident from the facts adduced, is now compressed into less than 10 hours. It is therefore self-evident, to what an enormous extent the toil of the factory operative has increased during the last ten years.’    Thus, although the factory inspectors unceasingly, and quite rightly, commend the results of the Acts of 1844 and 1850, they admit that the shortening of the working day has already produced such an intensification of the labour itself as is injurious to the health of the worker and therefore to his labour-power as well. ‘In most of the cotton, worsted, and silk mills, an exhausting state of excitement necessary to enable the workers satisfactorily to mind the machinery, the motion of which has been greatly accelerated within the last few years, seems to me not unlikely to be one of the causes of that excess of mortality from lung disease, which Dr Greenhow has pointed out in his recent report on this subject.’ Capital’s tendency, as soon as a prolongation of the hours of labour is once for all forbidden, is to compensate for this by systematically raising the intensity of labour, and converting every improvement in machinery into a more perfect means for soaking up labour-power. There cannot be the slightest doubt that this process must soon lead once again to a critical point at which a further reduction in the hours of labour will be inevitable. On the other hand, the rapid advance of English industry between 1848 and the present time, i.e. during the period of the 10-hour working day, surpasses the advance made between 1833 and 1847, during the period of the 12-hour working day, by far more than the latter surpasses the advance made during the half century after the first introduction of the factory system, i.e. during the period of the unrestricted working day. 4. THE FACTORY      At the beginning of this chapter we considered the physical constituents of the factory, the organization of the system of machinery. We saw there how machinery, by appropriating the labour of women and children, augments the quantity of human material for capital to exploit, how it confiscates the whole of the worker’s lifetime by its immoderate extension of the working day, and finally how its progress, which permits an enormous increase in production within a shorter and shorter amount of time, serves as a means of systematically getting more work done within a given period of time, or, in other words, constantly exploiting labour-power more intensively. We now turn to the factory as a whole, and indeed in its most developed form. Dr Ure, the Pindar of the automatic factory, describes it, on the one hand, as ‘combined co-operation of many orders of work-people, adult and young, in tending with assiduous skill a system of productive machines continuously impelled by a central power’ (the prime mover); and on the other hand as ‘a vast automaton, composed of various mechanical and intellectual organs, acting in uninterrupted concert for the production of a common object, all of them being subordinate to a self-regulated moving force’. * These two descriptions are far from being identical. In one, the combined collective worker appears as the dominant subject [übergreifendes Subjekt], and the mechanical automaton as the object; in the other, the automaton itself is the subject, and the workers are merely conscious organs, co-ordinated with the unconscious organs of the automaton, and together with the latter subordinated to the central moving force. The first description is applicable to every possible employment of machinery on a large scale, the second is characteristic of its use by capital, and therefore of the modern factory system. Ure therefore prefers to present the central machine from which the motion comes as not only an automaton but an autocrat. ‘In these spacious halls the benignant power of steam summons around him his myriads of willing menials.’    Along with the tool, the skill of the worker in handling it passes over to the machine. The capabilities of the tool are emancipated from the restraints inseparable from human labour-power. This destroys the technical foundation on which the division of labour in manufacture was based. Hence, in place of the hierarchy of specialized workers that characterizes manufacture, there appears, in the automatic factory, a tendency to equalize and reduce to an identical level every kind of work that has to be done by the minders of the machines; in place of the artificially produced distinctions between the specialized workers, it is natural differences of age and sex that predominate. In so far as the division of labour re-appears in the factory, it takes the form primarily of a distribution of workers among the specialized machines, and of quantities of workers, who do not however form organized groups, among the various departments of the factory, in each of which they work at a number of similar machines placed together; only simple co-operation therefore takes place between them. The organized group peculiar to manufacture is replaced by the connection between the head worker and his few assistants. The essential division is that between workers who are actually employed on the machines (among whom are included a few who look after the engine) and those who merely attend them (almost exclusively children). More or less all the ‘feeders’ who supply the machines with the material which is to be worked up are counted as attendants. In addition to these two principal classes, there is a numerically unimportant group whose occupation it is to look after the whole of the machinery and repair it from time to time, composed of engineers, mechanics, joiners etc. This is a superior class of workers, in part scientifically educated, in part trained in a handicraft; they stand outside the realm of the factory workers, and are added to them only to make up an aggregate. This division of labour is purely technical. All work at a machine requires the worker to be taught from childhood upwards, in order that he may learn to adapt his own movements to the uniform and unceasing motion of an automaton. Since the machinery, taken as a whole, forms a system of machines of various kinds, working simultaneously and in combination, co-operation based upon it requires the distribution of various groups of workers among the different kinds of machine. But machine production abolishes the necessity of fixing this distribution in the manner of manufacture, i.e. by constantly appropriating the same worker to the same function. Since the motion of the whole factory proceeds not from the worker but from the machinery, the working personnel can continually be replaced without any interruption in the labour process. The most striking proof of this is afforded by the relay system, put into operation by the manufacturers during their revolt of 1848 to 1850. * Lastly, the speed with which machine work is learnt by young people does away with the need to bring up a special class of worker for exclusive employment by machinery. The work of those people who are merely attendants can, to some extent, be replaced in the factory by the use of machines. In addition to this, the very simplicity of the work allows a rapid and constant turnover of the individuals burdened with this drudgery. Thus although, from a technical point of view, the old system of division of labour is thrown overboard by machinery, it hangs on in the factory as a tradition handed down from manufacture, and is then systematically reproduced and fixed in a more hideous form by capital as a means of exploiting labour-power. The lifelong speciality of handling the same tool now becomes the lifelong speciality of serving the same machine. Machinery is misused in order to transform the worker, from his very childhood, into a part of a specialized machine. In this way, not only are the expenses necessary for his reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same time his helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and therefore upon the capitalist, is rendered complete. Here, as everywhere else, we must distinguish between the increased productivity which is due to the development of the social process of production, and that which is due to the exploitation by the capitalists of that development. In handicrafts and manufacture, the worker makes use of a tool; in the factory, the machine makes use of him. There the movements of the instrument of labour proceed from him, here it is the movements of the machine that he must follow. In manufacture the workers are the parts of a living mechanism. In the factory we have a lifeless mechanism which is independent of the workers, who are incorporated into it as its living appendages. ‘The wearisome routine of endless drudgery in which the same mechanical process is ever repeated, is like the torture of Sisyphus; the burden of toil, like the rock, is ever falling back upon the worn-out drudge.’    Factory work exhausts the nervous system to the uttermost; at the same time, it does away with the many-sided play of the muscles, and confiscates every atom of freedom, both in bodily and in intellectual activity. Even the lightening of the labour becomes an instrument of torture, since the machine does not free the worker from the work, but rather deprives the work itself of all content. Every kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not only a labour process but also capital’s process of valorization, has this in common, but it is not the worker who employs the conditions of his work, but rather the reverse, the conditions of work employ the worker. However, it is only with the coming of machinery that this inversion first acquires a technical and palpable reality. Owing to its conversion into an automaton, the instrument of labour confronts the worker during the labour process in the shape of capital, dead labour, which dominates and soaks up living labour-power. The separation of the intellectual faculties of the production process from manual labour, and the transformation of those faculties into powers exercised by capital over labour, is, as we have already shown, finally completed by large-scale industry erected on the foundation of machinery. The special skill of each individual machine-operator, who has now been deprived of all significance, vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity in the face of the science, the gigantic natural forces, and the mass of social labour embodied in the system of machinery, which, together with those three forces, constitutes the power of the ‘master’. This ‘master’, therefore, in whose mind the machinery and his monopoly of it are inseparably united, contemptuously tells his ‘hands’, whenever he comes into conflict with them: ‘The factory operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which by a short training of the least expert can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired… The master’s machinery really plays a far more important part in the business of production than the labour and the skill of the operative, which six months’ education can teach, and a common labourer can learn.’ The technical subordination of the worker to the uniform motion of the instruments of labour, and the peculiar composition of the working group, consisting as it does of individuals of both sexes and all ages, gives rise to a barrack-like discipline, which is elaborated into a complete system in the factory, and brings the previously mentioned labour of superintendence to its fullest development, thereby dividing the workers into manual labourers and overseers, into the private soldiers and the N.C.O.s of an industrial army. ‘The main difficulty’ (in the automatic factory) ‘lay… above all in training human beings to renounce their desultory habits of work, and to identify themselves with the unvarying regularity of the complex automaton. To devise and administer a successful code of factory discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright! Even at the present day, when the system is perfectly organized and its labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to convert persons past the age of puberty into useful factory hands.’ In the factory code, the capitalist formulates his autocratic power over his workers like a private legislator, and purely as an emanation of his own will, unaccompanied by either that division of responsibility otherwise so much approved of by the bourgeoisie, or the still more approved representative system. This code is merely the capitalist caricature of the social regulation of the labour process which becomes necessary in co-operation on a large scale and in the employment in common of instruments of labour, and especially of machinery. The overseer’s book of penalties replaces the slave-driver’s lash. All punishments naturally resolve themselves into fines and deductions from wages, and the law-giving talent of the factory Lycurgus* so arranges matters that a violation of his laws is, if possible, more profitable to him than the keeping of them. Here we shall merely allude to the material conditions under which factory labour is performed. Every sense organ is injured by the artificially high temperatures, by the dust-laden atmosphere, by the deafening noise, not to mention the danger to life and limb among machines which are so closely crowded together, a danger which, with the regularity of the seasons, produces its list of those killed and wounded in the industrial battle. The economical use of the social means of production, matured and forced as in a hothouse by the factory system, is turned in the hands of capital into systematic robbery of what is necessary for the life of the worker while he is at work, i.e. space, light, air and protection against the dangerous or the unhealthy concomitants of the production process, not to mention the theft of appliances for the comfort of the worker. Was Fourier wrong when he called factories ‘mitigated jails’?12*  5. THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN WORKER AND MACHINE      The struggle between the capitalist and the wage-labourer starts with the existence of the capital-relation itself. It rages throughout the period of manufacture. But only since the introduction of machinery has the worker fought against the instrument of labour itself, capital’s material mode of existence. He is in revolt against this particular form of the means of production because it is the material foundation of the capitalist mode of production. In the seventeenth century nearly all Europe experienced workers’ revolts against the ribbon-loom, a machine for weaving ribbons and lace trimmings called in Germany Bandmühle, Schnurmühle, or Mühlenstuhl. In the 1630s, a wind-driven sawmill, erected near London by a Dutchman, succumbed to the rage of the mob. Even as late as the beginning of the eighteenth century, saw-mills driven by water overcame the opposition of the people only with great difficulty, supported as this opposition was by Parliament. No sooner had Everett constructed the first wool-shearing machine to be driven by water-power (1758) than it was set on fire by 100, people who had been thrown out of work. Fifty thousand workers, who had previously lived by carding wool, petitioned Parliament against Arkwright’s scribbling mills and carding engines. The large-scale destruction of machinery which occurred in the English manufacturing districts during the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century, largely as a result of the employment of the power-loom, and known as the Luddite movement, gave the anti-Jacobin government, composed of such people as Sidmouth and Castlereagh, a pretext for the most violent and reactionary measures. It took both time and experience before the workers learnt to distinguish between machinery and its employment by capital, and therefore to transfer their attacks from the material instruments of production to the form of society which utilizes those instruments. The struggles over wages within the manufacturing system presuppose manufacture, and are in no sense directed against its existence. The opposition to the establishment of manufactures proceeds from the guild-masters and the privileged towns, not from the wage-labourers. Hence the writers of the manufacturing period treat the division of labour predominantly as a means of virtually making up for a shortage of workers, and not of actually displacing them. This distinction is very clear. If someone says that 100 million people would be required in England to spin with the old spinning-wheel the cotton that is now spun with mules by 500, people, this does not mean that the mules took the place of those millions who never existed. It means only that many million workers would be required to replace the spinning machinery. If, on the other hand, we say that in England the power-loom threw 800, weavers onto the streets, we do not refer to existing machinery, which would have to be replaced by a certain number of workers, but to an actually existing number of workers who were in fact replaced or displaced by the looms. Handicraft labour, even if it was subdivided into many different parts, remained the basis throughout the period of manufacture. The demands of the new colonial markets could not be satisfied by the relatively small number of urban workers handed down from the Middle Ages, and the manufactures proper opened out new fields of production to the rural population which had been driven from the land by the dissolution of the feudal system. At that time, therefore, it was the positive side of the division of labour and cooperation in the workshops which emerged most clearly, i.e. the fact that they allowed the workers to be employed more productively. Long before the period of large-scale industry, cooperation and the concentration of the instruments of labour in the hands of a few people gave rise, in numerous countries where these methods were applied to agriculture, to great, sudden and forcible revolutions in the mode of production, and, as a result, in the conditions of existence and the means of employment of the rural population. But here the struggle at first takes place more between large and small landed proprietors than between capital and wage-labour; on the other hand, when labourers are displaced by the instruments of labour, by sheep, horses, etc., in that case direct acts of violence are in the first instance the pre-condition of the industrial revolution. First the labourers are driven from the land, and then the sheep arrive. Very extensive thefts of land, as perpetrated in England for instance, are the means whereby large-scale agriculture first gains a field of application. Hence this transformation in agriculture initially tends to have the appearance of a political revolution. The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a machine, immediately becomes a competitor of the worker himself. The self-valorization of capital by means of the machine is related directly to the number of workers whose conditions of existence have been destroyed by it. The whole system of capitalist production is based on the worker’s sale of his labour-power as a commodity. The division of labour develops this labour-power in a one-sided way, by reducing it to the highly particularized skill of handling a special tool. When it becomes the job of the machine to handle this tool, the use-value of the worker’s labour-power vanishes, and with it its exchange-value. The worker becomes unsaleable, like paper money thrown out of currency by legal enactment. The section of the working class thus rendered superfluous by machinery, i.e. converted into a part of the population no longer directly necessary for the self-valorization of capital, either goes under in the unequal contest between the old handicraft and manufacturing production and the new machine production, or else floods all the more easily accessible branches of industry, swamps the labour-market, and makes the price of labour-power fall below its value. It is supposed to be a great consolation to the pauperized workers that, firstly, their sufferings are only temporary (‘a temporary inconvenience’) and, secondly, machinery only gradually seizes control of the whole of a given field of production, so that the extent and the intensity of its destructive effect is diminished. The first consolation cancels out the second. When machinery seizes on an industry by degrees, it produces chronic misery among the workers who compete with it. Where the transition is rapid, the effect is acute and is felt by great masses of people. World history offers no spectacle more frightful than the gradual extinction of the English hand-loom weavers; this tragedy dragged on for decades, finally coming to an end in 1838. Many of the weavers died of starvation, many vegetated with their families for a long period on 2 1/2d. a day. In India, on the other hand, the English cotton machinery produced an acute effect. The Governor General reported as follows in 1834–5: ‘The misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce. The bones of the cotton-weavers are bleaching the plains of India.’ Of course, in turning the weavers out of this ‘temporal’ world, the machinery caused them a ‘temporary inconvenience’. * But in any case, since machinery is continually seizing on new fields of production, its ‘temporary’ effect is really permanent. Hence the character of independence from and estrangement towards the worker, which the capitalist mode of production gives to the conditions of labour and the product of labour, develops into a complete and total antagonism with the advent of machinery. It is therefore when machinery arrives on the scene that the worker for the first time revolts savagely against the instruments of labour. The instrument of labour strikes down the worker. The direct antagonism between the two is at its most apparent whenever newly introduced machinery enters into competition with handicrafts or manufactures handed down from former times. But within large-scale industry itself the continual improvement of machinery and the development of the automatic system has an analogous effect. ‘The object of improved machinery is to diminish manual labour, to provide for the performance of a process or the completion of a link in a manufacture by the aid of an iron instead of the human apparatus.’ ‘The adaptation of power to machinery heretofore moved by hand is almost of daily occurrence… the minor improvements in machinery having for their object economy of power, the production of better work, the turning off more work in the same time, or in supplying the place of a child, a female, or a man, are constant, and although sometimes apparently of no great moment, have somewhat important results.’ ‘Whenever a process requires peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn, as soon as possible, from the cunning workman, who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is placed in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so self-regulating that a child can superintend it.’ ‘On the automatic plan skilled labour gets progressively superseded.’ ‘The effect of improvements in machinery, not merely in superseding the necessity for the employment of the same quantity of adult labour as before, in order to produce a given result, but in substituting one description of human labour for another, the less skilled for the more skilled, juvenile for adult, female for male, causes a fresh disturbance in the rate of wages.’ ‘The effect of substituting the self-acting mule for the common mule, is to discharge the greater part of the men spinners, and to retain adolescents and children.’ The machine system’s extraordinary capacity for expansion is a result of accumulated practical experience, the extent of the mechanical instruments already available for use, and the constant advance of technology; it has shown what giant strides it can take under the pressure of the shortened working day. But who in 1860, the year in which the English cotton industry reached its zenith, would have dreamt of the galloping pace of improvements in machinery, and the corresponding displacement of manual labour, which the stimulus of the American Civil War called forth in the following three years? A couple of examples from the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will suffice on this point. A Manchester manufacturer states: ‘We formerly had seventy-five carding engines, now we have twelve, doing the same quantity of work… We are doing with fewer hands by fourteen, at a saving in wages of £ a week. Our estimated saving in waste is about 10 per cent in the quantity of cotton consumed.’ ‘In another fine-spinning mill in Manchester, I was informed that through increased speed and the adoption of some self-acting processes, a reduction had been made, in number, of a fourth in one department, and of above half in another, and that the introduction of the combing machine in place of the second carding, had considerably reduced the number of hands formerly employed in the carding-room.’ Another spinning-mill is estimated to effect a saving of ‘hands’ of 10 per cent. Messrs Gilmour, spinners at Manchester, make this statement: ‘In our blowing-room department we consider our expense with new machinery is fully one-third less in wages and hands… in the jack-frame and drawing-frame room, about one-third less in expense, and likewise one-third less in hands; in the spinning-room about one-third less in expenses. But this is not all; when our yarn goes to the manufacturers, it is so much better by the application of our new machinery, that they will produce a greater quantity of cloth, and cheaper than from the yarn produced by old machinery.’ Mr Redgrave, the factory inspector, remarks in connection with this: ‘The reduction of hands against increased production is, in fact, constantly taking place; in woollen mills the reduction commenced some time since, and is continuing; a few days since, the master of a school in the neighbourhood of Rochdale said to me, that the great falling off in the girls’ school is not only caused by the distress, but by the changes of machinery in the woollen mills, in consequence of which a reduction of seventy short-timers had taken place.’    The following table shows the total result of the mechanical improvements in the English cotton industry resulting from the American Civil War*:        Hence, between 1861 and 1868, cotton factories disappeared, in other words, more productive machinery on a larger scale was concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of capitalists. The number of power-looms decreased by 20,663; but since their product increased in the same period, an improved loom yielded more than an old one. Finally, the number of spindles increased by 1,612,541, while the number of workers employed decreased by 50,505. The ‘temporary’ misery inflicted on the workers by the cotton crisis was therefore heightened and made permanent by the rapid and continuous progress of machinery. But machinery does not just act as a superior competitor to the worker, always on the point of making him superfluous. It is a power inimical to him, and capital proclaims this fact loudly and deliberately, as well as making use of it. It is the most powerful weapon for suppressing strikes, those periodic revolts of the working class against the autocracy of capital. According to Gaskell, the steam-engine was from the very first an antagonist of ‘human power’, an antagonist that enabled the capitalists to tread underfoot the growing demands of the workers, which threatened to drive the infant factory system into crisis. It would be possible to write a whole history of the inventions made since 1830 for the sole purpose of providing capital with weapons against working-class revolt. We would mention, above all, the self-acting mule, because it opened up a new epoch in the automatic system. Nasmyth, the inventor of the steam-hammer, gave the following evidence before the Commission on Trades Unions, with regard to the improvements in machinery he himself introduced as a result of the wide-spread and long-lasting strikes of the engineers in 1851. ‘The characteristic feature of our modern mechanical improvements, is the introduction of self-acting tool machinery. What every mechanical workman has now to do, and what every boy can do, is not to work himself but to superintend the beautiful labour of the machine. The whole class of workmen that depend exclusively on their skill, is now done away with. Formerly, I employed four boys to every mechanic. Thanks to these new mechanical combinations, I have reduced the number of grown-up men from 1, to 750. The result was a considerable increase in my profits.’*    Ure says this of the colouring machines used in calico printing: ‘At length capitalists sought deliverance from this intolerable bondage’ (namely the terms of their contracts with the workers, which they saw as burdensome) ‘in the resources of science, and were speedily re-instated in their legitimate rule, that of the head over the inferior members.’ Then, speaking of an invention for dressing warps, whose immediate occasion was a strike, he says: ‘The combined malcontents, who fancied themselves impregnably intrenched behind the old lines of division of labour, found their flanks turned and their defences rendered useless by the new mechanical tactics, and were obliged to surrender at discretion.’ Of the invention of the self-acting mule, he says: ‘A creation destined to restore order among the industrious classes… This invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that when capital enlists science into her service, the refractory hand of labour will always be taught docility.’ Although Ure’s work appeared in 1835, at a time when the factory system was still comparatively little developed, it remains the classical expression of the spirit of the factory, not only because of its undisguised cynicism, but also because of the naïveté with which it blurts out the thoughtless contradictions of the capitalist brain. For instance, after unfolding the above-mentioned ‘doctrine’ that capital, with the aid of science, which has been taken onto the payroll, always reduces the refractory hand of labour to docility, he waxes indignant because ‘physico-mechanical science… has been accused of lending itself to the rich capitalist as an instrument for harassing the poor’. After preaching a long sermon to show how advantageous the rapid development of machinery is to the workers, he warns them that by their obstinacy and their strikes they hasten that development. ‘Violent revulsions of this nature,’ he says, ‘display short-sighted man in the contemptible character of a self-tormentor.’ A few pages before this he states the contrary: ‘Had it not been for the violent collisions and interruptions resulting from erroneous views among the factory operatives, the factory system would have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially for all concerned.’ Then he exclaims again: ‘Fortunately for the state of society in the cotton districts of Great Britain, the improvements in machinery are gradual.’ ‘It’ (the introduction of improvements in machinery) ‘is said to lower the rate of earnings of adults by displacing a portion of them, and thus rendering their number superabundant as compared with the demand for their labour. It certainly augments the demand for the labour of children and increases the rate of their wages.’ On the other hand, this same dispenser of consolation defends the lowness of the children’s wages on the ground that it prevents parents from sending their children into the factory at too early an age. The whole of his book is a vindication of a working day of unrestricted length; that Parliament should forbid children of 13 years of age to be exhausted by working 12 hours a day reminds his liberal soul of the darkest days of the Middle Ages. This does not prevent him from calling upon the factory workers to thank Providence, which by means of machinery has given them ‘the leisure to think of their immortal interests’. 6. THE COMPENSATION THEORY, WITH REGARD TO THE WORKERS DISPLACED BY MACHINERY      A whole series of bourgeois political economists, including James Mill, MacCulloch, Torrens, Senior and John Stuart Mill, assert that all machinery that displaces workers simultaneously, and necessarily, sets free an amount of capital adequate to employ precisely those workers displaced. Let us assume that a capitalist employs 100 workers at £ a year each in a carpet factory. The variable capital annually laid out therefore amounts to £3,000. Let us then assume that he dismisses fifty of his workers, and employs the remaining fifty with machinery that costs him £1,500. To simplify matters, we take no account of buildings, coal, etc. Finally, let the raw material annually consumed cost £3,000, both before and after the change. Is any capital ‘set free’ by this metamorphosis? Before the change, the total sum of £6, consisted half of constant and half of variable capital. After the change it consists of £4, constant (£3, raw material and £1, machinery) and £1, variable capital. The variable capital, instead of being one-half, is only one-quarter of the total capital. Instead of being set free, a part of the capital is here locked up in such a way as to cease to be exchanged for labour-power; variable has been changed into constant capital. Other things being equal, the capital of £6, can now employ no more than fifty men. With each improvement in the machinery, it will employ fewer people. If the newly introduced machinery had cost less than the labour-power and implements displaced by it, if for instance instead of costing £1,500, it has cost only £1,000, a variable capital of £1, would have been converted into constant capital, and locked up in it, and a capital of £ would have been set free. The latter sum, given the same annual wage-bill, would form a fund sufficient to employ about sixteen out of the fifty men dismissed, or rather less than sixteen, for, in order to be employed as capital, a part of this £ must in its turn be transformed into constant capital, thus leaving only the remainder to be laid out in the purchase of labour-power. But suppose, in addition to this, that the making of the new machinery employs an increased number of mechanics. Can this be regarded as compensation for the carpet-makers who have been thrown on the streets? At best, the construction of the machinery will still employ fewer men than its application displaces. The sum of £1,500, which previously represented the wages of the dismissed carpet-makers, now represents in the shape of machinery, (1) the value of the means of production used in the construction of that machinery, (2) the wages of the mechanics who constructed it and (3) the surplus-value falling to the share of their ‘master’. Moreover, the machinery need not be renewed until it is worn out. Hence, in order to keep the increased number of mechanics in constant employment, one carpet manufacturer after another must replace workers with machines. In fact the apologists for capitalism do not have in mind this sort of liberation of capital. They are thinking more of the means of subsistence of the workers who have been ‘set free’. It cannot be denied in the above instance that the machinery not only liberates fifty men, thus placing them at the disposal of other capitalists, but also, at the same time, withdraws from their consumption, and sets free, £1, worth of means of subsistence. The simple and by no means new fact that machinery sets the workers free from their means of subsistence is expressed in economic language by saying that machinery sets free means of subsistence for the workers, or converts those means of subsistence into capital with which to employ them. Everything, as you see, depends on the way things are put, Nominibus mollire licet mala. *    This theory implies that the £1, worth of means of subsistence was capital that was being valorized by the labour of the fifty men dismissed. Accordingly, the capital ceases to be employed as soon as the workers begin their forced holiday, and never rests until it has found a new ‘placing’ in which the above-mentioned fifty can again consume it productively. On this theory, the capital and the workers must sooner or later come together again, and that is when the compensation will appear. Hence the sufferings of the workers displaced by machinery are as transient as worldly wealth. But the £1, worth of means of subsistence never confronted the dismissed workers as capital. This role was reserved for the sum of £1, later on, when it had been transformed into machinery. If we look more closely, it will be seen that the initial sum of £1, represented only a portion of the carpets produced in a year by the fifty dismissed men, and they received this part as wages from their employer, paid in money instead of in kind: With the carpets thus transformed into £1, they bought means of subsistence to the same value. These means, therefore, were to them not capital but commodities, and they, as regards these commodities, were not wage-labourers, but buyers. The circumstance that they were ‘set free’ by the machinery from the means of purchase changed them from buyers into non-buyers. Hence a lessened demand for those commodities. Voilà tout. If this diminution of demand is not compensated for by an increase in demand from another direction, the market price of the commodities falls. If this state of things lasts for some time, and increases in extent, there follows the displacement of the workers employed in the production of those commodities. A part of the capital, which previously produced the necessary means of subsistence, is now reproduced in another form. While prices are falling, and capital is being displaced, the workers employed in the production of the necessary means of subsistence are in turn ‘set free’ from a part of their wages. Instead, therefore, of proving that when machinery frees the worker from his means of subsistence, it simultaneously converts those means into capital for his further employment, our friends the apologists, with their well-tried law of supply and demand, prove the opposite, namely that machinery throws workers onto the streets, not only in that branch of production into which it has been introduced, but also in branches into which it has not been introduced. The real facts, which are travestied by the optimism of the economists, are these: the workers, when driven out of the workshop by the machinery, are thrown onto the labour-market. Their presence in the labour-market increases the number of labour-powers which are at the disposal of capitalist exploitation. In Part VII we shall see that this effect of machinery, which has been represented as a compensation for the working class, is, on the contrary, a most frightful scourge. For the present I will only say this: workers who have been thrown out of work in a given branch of industry can no doubt look for employment in another branch. If they find it, and thus renew the bond between them and the means of subsistence, this takes place only through the agency of a new, additional capital which is seeking investment, and in no way through the agency of the capital that was already functioning previously and was then converted into machinery. And even if they do find employment, what a miserable prospect they face! Crippled as they are by the division of labour, these poor devils are worth so little outside their old trade that they cannot find admission into any industries except a few inferior and therefore over-supplied and under-paid branches. Furthermore, every branch of industry attracts each year a new stream of men, who furnish a contingent from which to fill up vacancies, and to draw a supply for expansion. As soon as machinery has set free a part of the workers employed in a given branch of industry, the reserve men are also diverted into new channels of employment, and become absorbed in other branches; meanwhile the original victims, during the period of transition, for the most part starve and perish. It is an undoubted fact that machinery is not as such responsible for ‘setting free’ the worker from the means of subsistence. It cheapens and increases production in the branch it seizes on, and at first leaves unaltered the quantity of the means of subsistence produced in other branches. Hence, after the introduction of machinery, society possesses as much of the necessaries of life as before, if not more, for the workers who have been displaced, not to mention the enormous share of the annual product wasted by non-workers. And this is the point relied on by our economic apologists! The contradictions and antagonisms inseparable from the capitalist application of machinery do not exist, they say, because they do not arise out of machinery as such, but out of its capitalist application! Therefore, since machinery in itself shortens the hours of labour, but when employed by capital it lengthens them; since in itself it lightens labour, but when employed by capital it heightens its intensity; since in itself it is a victory of man over the forces of nature but in the hands of capital it makes man the slave of those forces; since in itself it increases the wealth of the producers, but in the hands of capital it makes them into paupers, the bourgeois economist simply states that the contemplation of machinery in itself demonstrates with exactitude that all these evident contradictions are a mere semblance, present in everyday reality, but not existing in themselves, and therefore having no theoretical existence either. Thus he manages to avoid racking his brains any more, and in addition implies that his opponent is guilty of the stupidity of contending, not against the capitalist application of machinery, but against machinery itself. No doubt the bourgeois economist is far from denying that temporary inconveniences may result from the capitalist use of machinery. But where is the medal without its reverse side! Any other utilization of machinery than the capitalist one is to him impossible. Exploitation of the worker by the machine is therefore identical for him with exploitation of the machine by the worker. Therefore whoever reveals the real situation with the capitalist employment of machinery does not want machinery to be employed at all, and is an enemy of social progress! This is exactly the reasoning of Bill Sikes, the celebrated cut-throat. * ‘Gentlemen of the jury, no doubt the throat of this commercial traveller has been cut. But that is not my fault, it is the fault of the knife. Must we, for such a temporary inconvenience, abolish the use of the knife? Only consider! Where would agriculture and trade be without the knife? Is it not as salutary in surgery, as it is skilled in anatomy? And a willing assistant at the festive table? If you abolish the knife – you hurl us back into the depths of barbarism.’    Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in those industries into which it is introduced, it may, despite this, bring about an increase in employment in other industries. This effect of machinery, however, has nothing in common with the so-called theory of compensation. Since every article produced by a machine is cheaper than a similar article produced by hand, we deduce the following absolute law: if the total quantity of the article produced by machinery is equal to the total quantity of the article previously produced by a handicraft or by manufacture, and now made by machinery, then total labour expended is diminished. The increase in the labour required to produce the instruments of labour themselves, the machinery, coal, etc. must be less than the reduction in labour achieved by the employment of machinery; otherwise the product of the machine would be as dear as, or dearer than, the product of the manual labour. But as a matter of fact, the total quantity of the article produced by machinery with a diminished number of workers, instead of remaining equal to the total quantity of the hand-made article that has been displaced, exceeds this by far. Suppose that 400, yards of cloth have been produced on power-looms by fewer weavers than could weave 100, yards by hand. The quadrupled product contains four times as much raw material. Hence the production of raw material must be quadrupled. But as regards the instruments of labour consumed, such as buildings, coal, machinery and so on, it is different; the limit of the possible increase in the amount of additional labour required to produce them varies with the difference between the quantity of the machine-made article and the quantity of the same article that the same number of workers could make by hand. Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, the immediate effect is to increase production in the other industries that provide the first with means of production. How far employment is thereby found for an increased number of workers depends, given the length of the working day and the intensity of labour, on the composition of the capital employed, i.e. on the ratio of its constant to its variable component. * This ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with the extent to which machinery has already penetrated, or is engaged in penetrating, those trades. The number of men condemned to work in coal and metal mines has been enormously swollen by the progress of machine production in England, although the growth in numbers has been slowed down during the last few decades by the introduction of new machinery into the mining industries. Along with the machine, a new type of worker springs to life: the machine-maker. We have already learnt that machinery is seizing control even of this branch of production on an ever-increasing scale. As to raw materials, there can be no doubt that the rapid advance of cotton spinning not only promoted as if in a hot house the growing of cotton in the United States, and with it the African slave trade, but also made slave-breeding the chief business of the so-called border slave states.† In 1790, when the first census of slaves was taken in the United States, their number was 697,000; in 1861 it had nearly reached four millions. On the other hand, it is no less certain that the blossoming of the English woollen factories, together with the progressive transformation of arable land into sheep pasture, brought about the conversion of agricultural labourers into ‘supernumeraries’ and drove them in their masses from the land. Ireland, having during the last twenty years reduced its population by nearly one-half, is at this moment undergoing the process of still further reducing the number of its inhabitants to a level which will correspond exactly with the requirements of its landlords and the English woollen manufacturers. When machinery penetrates into any of the preliminary or intermediate stages through which an object of labour has to pass on its way to its final form, there is an increased yield of material in those stages, and simultaneously an increased demand for labour in the handicrafts or manufactures supplied by the machines. Spinning by machinery, for example, supplied yarn so cheaply and so abundantly that the hand-loom weavers were at first able to work full-time without increased outlay. Their earnings accordingly rose. This produced a flow of people into the cotton-weaving trade, until at length the 800, weavers called into existence by the jenny, the throstle and the mule were overwhelmed by the power-loom. So also, owing to the abundance of clothing materials produced by machinery, the number of tailors, seamstresses and needle-women went on increasing until the appearance of the sewing-machine. In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively small number of workers, increases the mass of raw materials, half-finished products and instruments of labour, the working-up of these raw materials and half-finished products becomes split up into innumerable subdivisions. There is thus an increase in the number of the branches of social production. Machine production drives the social division of labour immeasurably further than manufacture does, because it increases the productive power of the industries it seizes upon to a much greater degree. The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus-value and the mass of products in which surplus-value is embodied. It also increases the quantity of substances for the capitalists and their dependants to consume, and therefore the size of these social strata themselves. Their growing wealth, and the relatively diminished number of workers required to produce the means of subsistence, begets both new luxury requirements and the means of satisfying them. A larger portion of the social product is converted into surplus product, and a larger portion of the surplus product is reproduced and consumed in a multitude of refined shapes. In other words, the production of luxuries increases. The products are also made more refined and more varied by the new world market relations created by large-scale industry. Not only are greater quantities of foreign luxury articles exchanged for home products, but a greater mass of foreign raw materials, ingredients and half-finished articles are used as means of production in the home industries. Owing to these relations with the world market, the demand for labour increases in the transport industry, and splits the latter into numerous extra subdivisions. The increase in means of production and subsistence, accompanied by a relative diminution in the number of workers, provides the impulse for an extension of work that can only bear fruit in the distant future, such as the construction of canals, docks, tunnels, bridges and so on. Entirely new branches of production, creating new fields of labour, are also formed as the direct result either of machinery or of the general industrial changes brought about by it. But the place occupied by these branches in total production is far from important, even in the most developed countries. The number of workers they employ is directly proportional to the demand created by these industries for the crudest form of manual labour. The chief industries of this kind are, at present, gas-works, telegraphy, photography, steam navigation and railways. According to the census of 1861 for England and Wales, we find in the gas industry (gas-works, production of mechanical apparatus, servants of the gas companies, etc. ), 15, persons; in telegraphy, 2,399; in photography, 2,366; in steam navigation, 3,570; and in railways, 70,599, of whom the unskilled ‘navvies’, more or less permanently employed, and the whole administrative and commercial staff, make up about 28,000. The total number of persons, therefore, employed in these five new industries amounts to 94,145. Lastly, the extraordinary increase in the productivity of large-scale industry, accompanied as it is by both a more intensive and a more extensive exploitation of labour-power in all other spheres of production, permits a larger and larger part of the working class to be employed unproductively. Hence it is possible to reproduce the ancient domestic slaves, on a constantly extending scale, under the name of a servant class, including men-servants, women-servants, lackeys, etc. According to the census of 1861, the population of England and Wales was 20,066,224; 9,776, of these were males and 10,289, females. If we deduct from this population, firstly, all who are too old or too young for work, all ‘unproductive’ women, young persons and children; then the ‘ideological’ groups, such as members of the government, priests, lawyers, soldiers, etc. ; then all the people exclusively occupied in consuming the labour of others in the form of ground rent, interest, etc. ; and lastly, paupers, vagabonds and criminals, there remain in round numbers eight millions of the two sexes of every age, including in that number every capitalist who is in any way engaged in industry, commerce or finance. These eight millions are distributed as follows:    Agricultural labourers (including shepherds, farm servants and maidservants living in the houses of farmers)              1,098,      Those employed in cotton, woollen, worsted, flax, hemp, silk and jute factories, in stocking-making and lace-making by machinery              642,      Those employed in coal-mines and metal mines              565,      Those employed in metal works (blast-furnaces, rolling-mills, etc.) and metal manufactures of every kind              396,      The servant class              1,208,      All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, taken together, number 1,208,442; those employed in textile factories and metal industries, taken together, number 1,039,605; in both cases less than the number of modern domestic slaves. What an elevating consequence of the capitalist exploitation of machinery! 7. REPULSION AND ATTRACTION OF WORKERS THROUGH THE DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINE PRODUCTION. CRISES IN THE COTTON INDUSTRY      All the more respectable representatives of political economy concede that the introduction of new machinery has a baneful effect on the workers in the old handicrafts and manufactures with which this machinery at first competes. Almost all of them bemoan the slavery of the factory worker. And what is the great trump-card they play? That machinery, after the horrors of the period of its introduction and development have subsided, in the final analysis increases, rather than diminishing, the number of wage-slaves! Yes, political economy joyfully proclaims the theory, which is hideous to every ‘philanthropist’ who believes that the capitalist mode of production is an eternal necessity ordained by nature, that after a period of growth and transition, and even when it is already founded on production by machinery, the factory system grinds down more workers than it originally threw onto the streets. It is true that in some cases, as we saw from the example of the English worsted and silk factories, an extraordinary extension of the factory system may, at a certain stage of its development, be accompanied not only by a relative, but by an absolute decrease in the number of workers employed. * In 1860, when a special census of all the factories in the United Kingdom was taken by order of Parliament, the factories in those parts of Lancashire, Cheshire and Yorkshire included in the district of Mr R. Baker, the factory inspector, numbered 652; 570 of these contained 85, power-looms and 6,819, spindles (not including doubling-spindles), utilized 27, horse-power in steam-engines and 1, horse-power in water-wheels, and employed 94, persons. In 1865, the same factories contained 95, looms and 7,025, spindles, utilized 28, horse-power in steam-engines and 1, horse-power in water-wheels, and employed 88, persons. Between 1860 and 1865, therefore, the increase in looms was 11 per cent, in spindles 3 per cent, and in engine-power 3 per cent, while the number of persons employed decreased 5 1/ per cent. Between 1852 and 1862 considerable growth occurred in English woollen manufacture, while the number of workers employed in that industry remained almost stationary. ‘This shows to what a great extent the introduction of new machines had superseded the labour of preceding periods.’ In certain cases, the increase in the number of factory workers employed is only apparent, i.e. it is not due to the extension of industries already based on machine production but to the gradual annexation of neighbouring branches of industry. For instance, the increase in power-looms and in the number of factory workers employed by them between 1838 and 1856 was, in the cotton trade, simply a result of the extension of this branch of industry; but in the other trades it resulted from the application of steam-power to the carpet-loom, the ribbon-loom and the linen-loom, which had previously been driven by muscle-power. Hence the increase in the number of workers in these latter trades was merely an expression of the reduction in the total number of workers employed. Finally, we have considered this question entirely apart from the fact that everywhere, except in the metallurgical industries, young persons (under 18), women and children form by far the most preponderant element in the factory personnel. Nevertheless, in spite of the mass of workers actually driven out and virtually replaced by machinery, we can understand how workers in factories may become more numerous than the manufacturing artisans and handicraftsmen they have displaced; their numbers grow through the building of more factories or the extension of old factories in a given industry. Suppose, for example, that under the old method of running the factory a capital of £ is employed every week, two-fifths being constant and three-fifths variable capital, i.e. £ being laid out in means of production, and £300, say £ per man, in labour-power. With the introduction of machinery the composition of the total capital is altered. We will assume that it consists now of four-fifths constant and one-fifth variable, which means that only £ is now laid out in labour-power. Consequently, two-thirds of the workers are dismissed. If now the business expands, and the total capital employed grows to £1,500, the other conditions of production remaining the same, the number of workers employed will increase to 300, just as many as before the introduction of the machinery. If the capital employed grows some more, to £2,000, 400 men will be employed, or one-third more than under the old system. Their numbers have in fact increased by 100, but in relative terms, i.e. in proportion to the total capital advanced, they have diminished by 800, for the £2, of capital would under the old method of running the enterprise have employed 1, instead of 400 workers. Hence a relative decrease in the number of workers employed is consistent with an actual increase in that number. We assumed above that while the total capital increased, its composition remained the same, because the conditions of production remained constant. But we have already seen that every advance in the use of machinery entails an increase in the constant component of capital, that part which consists of machinery, raw material, etc., and a decrease in its variable component, the part laid out in labour-power. We also know that in no other system of production is improvement so continuous and the composition of the capital employed so subject to variation as in the factory system. This constant variation is however equally constantly interrupted by periods of rest, during which there is a merely quantitative extension of factories on the existing technical basis. During such periods the number of workers employed increases. Thus in 1835 the total number of workers in the cotton, woollen, worsted, flax and silk factories of the United Kingdom was only 354,684; while in 1861 the number of power-loom weavers alone (of both sexes and all ages, from 8 years old upwards) was 230,654. Admittedly, this growth appears less significant when we consider that in 1838 the hand-loom weavers with their families (employed by the weavers themselves) still numbered 800,000, not to mention those thrown out of work in Asia and on the European Continent. In the few remarks I have still to make on this point, I shall refer in part to relations of a purely practical nature, the existence of which has not yet been revealed by our theoretical presentation. As long as machine production expands in a given branch of industry at the expense of the old handicrafts or of manufacture, the result is as certain as is the result of an encounter between an army with breach-loading rifles and one with bows and arrows. This first period, during which machinery conquers its field of operations, is of decisive importance, owing to the extraordinary profits it helps to produce. These profits not only form a source of accelerated accumulation, they also attract into the favoured sphere of production a large part of the additional social capital that is constantly being created, and is always seeking out new areas of investment. The special advantages of this initial period of furious activity are felt in every branch of production when it is newly penetrated by machinery. However, as soon as the factory system has attained a reasonable space to exist in, and reached a definite degree of maturity, and in particular as soon as the technical basis peculiar to it, machinery, is itself produced by machinery, as soon as coal-mining and iron-mining, the metallurgical industries, and the means of transport have been revolutionized; in short, as soon as the general conditions of production appropriate to large-scale industry have been established, this mode of production acquires an elasticity, a capacity for sudden extension by leaps and bounds, which comes up against no barriers but those presented by the availability of raw materials and the extent of sales outlets. On the one hand, the immediate effect of machinery is to increase the supply of raw material: thus, for example, the invention of the cotton gin increased the production of cotton. On the other hand, the cheapness of the articles produced by machinery and the revolution in the means of transport and communication provide the weapons for the conquest of foreign markets. By ruining handicraft production of finished articles in other countries, machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the production of its raw material. Thus India was compelled to produce cotton, wool, hemp, jute and indigo for Great Britain. By constantly turning workers into ‘supernumeraries’, large-scale industry, in all countries where it has taken root, spurs on rapid increases in emigration and the colonization of foreign lands, which are thereby converted into settlements for growing the raw material of the mother country, just as Australia, for example, was converted into a colony for growing wool. A new and international division of labour springs up, one suited to the requirements of the main industrial countries, and it converts one part of the globe into a chiefly agricultural field of production for supplying the other part, which remains a pre-eminently industrial field. This revolution is linked with far-reaching changes in agriculture which we need not discuss any further at this point. On the motion of Mr Gladstone, the House of Commons ordered, on 17 February 1867, that a return be made of the total quantity of grain, corn and flour of all sorts imported into and exported from the United Kingdom between 1831 and 1866. I give on the opposite page a summary of the result. The flour is given in quarters of corn. The factory system’s tremendous capacity for expanding with sudden immense leaps, and its dependence on the world market, necessarily give rise to the following cycle: feverish production, a consequent glut on the market, then a contraction of the market, which causes production to be crippled. The life of industry becomes a series of periods of moderate activity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation. The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the employment, and consequently the living conditions, of the workers becomes a normal state of affairs, owing to these periodic turns of the industrial cycle. Except in the periods of prosperity, a most furious combat rages between the capitalists for their individual share in the market. This share is directly proportional to the cheapness of the product. Apart from the rivalry this struggle gives rise to in the use of improved machinery for replacing labour-power, and the introduction of new methods of production, there also comes a time in every industrial cycle when a forcible reduction of wages beneath the value of labour-power is attempted so as to cheapen commodities. A necessary condition for the growth of the number of factory workers is thus a proportionally much more rapid growth in the amount of capital invested in factories. But this process of growth takes place only within the ebbs and flows of the industrial cycle. It is, in addition, constantly interrupted by the technical progress that at one time virtually takes the place of additional workers, and at another time actually drives workers out of employment. This qualitative change in machine production continually removes workers from the factories, or closes their doors to the fresh stream of recruits, while the purely quantitative extension of the factories absorbs not only the men thrown out of work but also fresh contingents of workers. The latter are thus continually repelled and attracted, slung backwards and forwards, while, at the same time, constant changes take place in the sex, age and skill of the industrial conscripts. The fate of the factory workers will best be depicted if we make a rapid survey of developments in the English cotton industry. From 1770 until 1815 the cotton trade underwent only five years of depression or stagnation. During this period of forty-five years the English manufacturers had a monopoly of machinery and a monopoly of the world market. From 1815 to 1821 depression; 1822 and 1823 prosperity; 1824, repeal of the Combination Laws, great extension of factories everywhere; 1825, crisis; 1826, great misery and riots among the factory workers; 1827, slight improvement; 1828, great increase in power-looms, and in exports; 1829, exports, especially to India, surpass all former years; 1830, glutted markets, great distress; 1831 to 1833, continued depression, the monopoly of the trade with India and China withdrawn from the East India Company; 1834, great increase of factories and machinery, shortage of hands. The new poor law furthers the migration of agricultural labourers into the factory districts. The country districts swept clear of children. White slave trade; 1835, great prosperity, simultaneous starvation of the hand-loom weavers; 1836, great prosperity; 1837 and 1838, depression and crisis; 1839, revival; 1840, great depression, riots, the military called out to intervene; 1841 and 1842, frightful suffering among the factory workers; 1842, the manufacturers lock their hands out of the factories in order to enforce the repeal of the Corn Laws. Workers stream in their thousands into the towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, are driven back by the military, and their leaders brought to trial at Lancaster; 1842, great misery; 1844, revival; 1845, great prosperity; 1846, continued improvement at first, then reaction. Repeal of the Corn Laws; 1847, crisis, general reduction of wages by 10 and more per cent in honour of the ‘big loaf’;* 1848, continued depression; Manchester under military protection; 1849, revival; 1850, prosperity; 1851, falling prices, low wages, frequent strikes; 1852, the situation begins to improve, strikes continue, the manufacturers threaten to import workers from abroad; 1853, increasing exports. Strike for three months, and great misery at Preston; 1854, prosperity, glutted markets; 1855, news of bankruptcies streams in from the United States, Canada and the markets of the Far East; 1856, great prosperity; 1857, crisis; 1858, improvement; 1859, great prosperity, increase in factories; 1860, zenith of the English cotton trade, the Indian, Australian and other markets so glutted with goods that even in 1863 they had not absorbed the whole lot; the French Treaty of Commerce, enormous growth of factories and machinery; 1861, prosperity continues for a time, reaction, the American Civil War, cotton famine; 1862 to 1863, complete collapse. The history of the cotton famine is too typical for us not to dwell on it for a moment. From indications as to conditions in the world market in 1860 and 1861, we see that the cotton famine came in the nick of time for the manufacturers, and was to some extent advantageous to them, a fact acknowledged in the reports of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, proclaimed in Parliament by Palmerston and Derby, and confirmed by events. Of course, among the 2, cotton mills in the United Kingdom in 1861 there were many small ones. According to the report of the factory inspector, Mr A. Redgrave, 392 out of the 2, mills included in his district, or 19 per cent, employed less than 10 horse-power each; 345, or 16 per cent, employed between 10 and 20 horse-power; while 1, employed upwards of 20 horse-power. The majority of the small mills were weaving sheds built during the period of prosperity after 1858, for the most part by speculators, of whom one supplied the yarn, another the machinery, a third the buildings, and they were run by men who had been overseers, or by other persons of small means. These small manufacturers mostly went to the wall. The same fate would have overtaken them in the commercial crisis which was staved off only by the cotton famine. Although they formed one-third of the total number of manufacturers, their mills absorbed much less than a third of the capital invested in the cotton trade. As to the extent of the stoppage, it appears from authentic estimates that in October 1862, 60· per cent of the spindles, and 58 per cent of the looms, were at a standstill. This refers to the cotton trade as a whole, and of course requires considerable modification for individual districts. Very few mills worked full time ( hours a week); all the others worked at intervals. Even in those few cases where full time was worked, and at the customary piece-rate, the weekly wages of the workers necessarily shrank, because good cotton was replaced by bad, Sea Island by Egyptian (in fine-spinning mills), American and Egyptian by Surat (Indian) and pure cotton by a mixture of waste and Surat. The shorter fibre of the Surat cotton and its dirty condition, the greater fragility of the thread, the substitution of all sorts of heavy ingredients for flour in sizing the warps, all these things lessened the speed of the machinery, or the number of looms that could be superintended by one weaver, increased the amount of labour necessitated by defects in the machinery, and reduced the piece-wage by reducing the amount of the product actually leaving the mill. Where Surat cotton was used, the loss to the workers when on full time amounted to 20 per cent, 30 per cent or more. But on top of this, the majority of the manufacturers reduced the piece-rate by 5, 7 1/ and 10 per cent. We can therefore grasp the situation of these workers employed for only 3, 3 1/ or 4 days a week, or for only 6 hours a day. Even in 1863, after a comparative improvement had set in, the weekly wages of spinners and weavers were 3s. 4d., 3s. 10d., 4s. 6d. and 5s. 1d. Even in this miserable state of affairs, however, the inventive spirit of the manufacturer did not stand still, but was exercised in making deductions from wages. These were to some extent inflicted as a penalty for defects in the finished article that were really due to his own bad cotton and his unsuitable machinery. Moreover, where the manufacturer owned the workers’ cottages, he paid himself his rents by deducting the amount from these miserable wages. Mr Redgrave tells us of self-acting minders (i.e. workers in charge of a pair of self-acting mules) ‘earning at the end of a fortnight’s full work 8s. 11d., and… from this sum was deducted the rent of the house, the manufacturer, however, returning half the rent as a gift. The minders took away the sum of 6s. lid. In many places the self-acting minders ranged from 5s. to 9s. per week, and the weavers from 2s. to 6s. per week, during the latter part of 1862.’ Even when short time was being worked, the rent was frequently deducted from the workers’ wages. No wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a kind of famine fever broke out. But more characteristic than all this was the revolution that took place in the production process at the expense of the workers. Experimenta in corpore vili,* like those of anatomists on frogs, were actually being made here. ‘Although,’ says Mr Redgrave, ‘I have given the actual earnings of the operatives in the several mills, it does not follow that they earn the same amount week by week. The operatives are subject to great fluctuation from the constant experimentalizing of the manufacturers… the earnings of the operatives rise and fall with the quality of the cotton mixings; sometimes they have been within 15 per cent of former earnings, and then, in a week or two, they have fallen off from 50 to 60 per cent.’ These experiments were not made just at the expense of the worker’s means of subsistence. His five senses also had to pay the penalty. ‘The people who are employed in making up Surat cotton complain very much. They inform me, on opening the bales of cotton there is an intolerable smell, which causes sickness… In the mixing, scribbling and carding rooms, the dust and dirt which are disengaged, irritate the air passages, and give rise to cough and difficulty of breathing. A disease of the skin, no doubt from the irritation of the dirt contained in the Surat cotton, also prevails… The fibre being so short, a great amount of size, both animal and vegetable, is used… Bronchitis is more prevalent owing to the dust. Inflammatory sore throat is common, from the same cause. Sickness and dyspepsia are produced by the frequent breaking of the weft, when the weaver sucks the weft through the eye of the shuttle.’ On the other hand, these flour-substitutes were a Fortunatus’s pursef† to the manufacturers because they increased the weight of the yarn. They caused ‘ lb. of raw material to weigh 261b. after it was woven’. In the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for the half-year ending 30 April 1864, we read the following: ‘The trade is availing itself of this resource at present to an extent which is even discreditable. I have heard on good authority of a cloth weighing 8 lb. which was made of 5£ lb. cotton and 2 1/ lb. size; and of another cloth weighing 5 1/ lb., of which 2 lb. was size. These were ordinary export shirtings. In cloths of other descriptions, as much as 50 per cent size is sometimes added; so that a manufacturer may, and does truly boast, that he is getting rich by selling cloth for less money per pound than he paid for the mere yarn of which they [sic] are composed.’ But the workers did not just have to suffer from the experiments of the manufacturers inside the mills, and of the municipalities outside, from reduced wages and absence of work, from want and from charity, and from the eulogies uttered in the Lords and the Commons. ‘Unfortunate females, in consequence of the cotton famine, were at its commencement thrown out of employment, and have thereby become outcasts of society; and now, though trade has revived, and work is plentiful, continue members of that unfortunate class, and are likely to continue so. There are also in the borough more youthful prostitutes than I have known for the last twenty-five years.’    We find, then, in the first forty-five years of the English cotton industry, from 1770 to 1815, only five years of crisis and stagnation; but this was the period of monopoly. The second period from 1815 to 1863 counts, during its forty-eight years, only twenty years of revival and prosperity against twenty-eight of depression and stagnation. Between 1815 and 1830 competition with the continent of Europe and with the United States sets in. After 1833, the extension of the Asiatic markets is enforced by ‘destruction of the human race’. * After the repeal of the Corn Laws, from 1846 to 1863, there are eight years of moderate activity and prosperity against nine years of depression and stagnation. The situation of the adult male workers, even during the years of prosperity, may be judged from the appended note. 8. THE REVOLUTIONARY IMPACT OF LARGE-SCALE INDUSTRY ON MANUFACTURE, HANDICRAFTS AND DOMESTIC INDUSTRY      (a) Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicrafts and on the Division of Labour      We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the handicraft division of labour. An example of the first sort is the reaping-machine; it replaces co-operation between reapers. A striking example of the second kind is the needle-making machine. According to Adam Smith, ten men in his time, using the system of the division of labour, made 48, sewing-needles every day. A single needle-making machine, however, makes 145, needles in a working day of 11 hours. One woman or one girl superintends four such machines, and so produces nearly 600, needles in a day, and over 3,000, in a week. A single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation or of manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of a handicraft character. But this reproduction of the handicraft system on the basis of machinery only forms a transition to the factory system which, as a rule, makes its appearance as soon as human muscles are replaced, for the purpose of driving the machines, by a mechanical motive power such as steam or water. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an industry may be carried on, on a small scale, by means of mechanical power. This is effected by hiring steam power, as is done in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of small caloric engines, as in some branches of weaving. In the Coventry ribbon industry the experiment of ‘cottage factories’ was a quite natural and spontaneous development. In the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an engine-house was built and the engine was connected by shafts with the looms in the cottages. In all cases the power was hired out at so much per loom. The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms were working or not. Each cottage held from two to six looms; some belonged to the weaver, some were bought on credit, some were hired. The struggle between these cottage factories and the factory proper lasted over twelve years. It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 cottage factories. Wherever the nature of the process has not necessitated production on a large scale, the new industries that have sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope making, steel pen making, etc., have, as a general rule, first passed through the handicraft stage, and then the manufacturing stage, as short phases of transition to the factory stage. The transition is very difficult in those cases where the production of the article by manufacture consists, not of a series of graduated processes, but of a great number of disconnected ones. This circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment of steel pen factories. Nevertheless, about fifteen years ago a machine was invented that automatically performed six separate operations at once. The first steel pens were supplied by the handicraft system, in the year 1820, at £ 4s. the gross; in 1830 they were supplied by manufacture at 8s., and today the factory system supplies them at a wholesale price of from 2d. to 6d. the gross. (b) The Impact of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries      With the development of the factory system and the revolution in agriculture that accompanies it, production in all the other branches of industry not only expands, but also alters its character. The principle of machine production, namely the division of the production process into its constituent phases, and the solution of the problems arising from this by the application of mechanics, chemistry and the whole range of the natural sciences, now plays the determining role everywhere. Hence machinery penetrates into manufacture for one specialized process after another. The solid crystallization of a hierarchy of specialized processes, which arose from the old division of labour, ceases to exist; it is dissolved, and makes way for constant changes. Quite apart from this, a fundamental transformation takes place in the composition of the collective labourer or, in other words, the combined working personnel. In contrast with the period of manufacture, the division of labour is now based, wherever possible, on the employment of women, of children of all ages and of unskilled workers, in short, of ‘cheap labour’, as the Englishman typically describes it. This is true not only for all large-scale production, whether machinery is employed or not, but also for the so-called domestic industries, whether carried on in the private dwellings of the workers, or in small workshops. This modern ‘domestic industry’ has nothing except the name in common with old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of which presupposes independent urban handicrafts, independent peasant farming and, above all, a dwelling-house for the worker and his family. That kind of industry has now been converted into an external department of the factory, the manufacturing workshop, or the warehouse. Besides the factory worker, the workers engaged in manufacture, and the handicraftsmen, whom it concentrates in large masses at one spot, and directly commands, capital also sets another army in motion, by means of invisible threads: the outworkers in the domestic industries, who live in the large towns as well as being scattered over the countryside. An example: the shirt factory of Messrs Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 1, workers in the factory itself, and 9, outworkers spread over the country districts. The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is carried out in a more shameless manner in modern manufacture than in the factory proper. This is because the technical foundation of the factory system, namely the substitution of machines for muscular power, and the light character of the labour, is almost entirely absent in manufacture, and at the same time women and excessively young children are subjected quite unscrupulously to the influence of poisonous substances. In the so-called domestic industries this exploitation is still more shameless than in modern manufacture, because the workers’ power of resistance declines with their dispersal; because a whole series of plundering parasites insinuate themselves between the actual employer and the worker he employs; because a domestic industry has always to compete either with the factory system, or with manufacturing in the same branch of production; because poverty robs the worker of the conditions most essential to his labour, of space, light and ventilation; because employment becomes more and more irregular; and, finally, because in these last places of refuge for the masses made ‘redundant’ by large-scale industry and agriculture, competition for work necessarily attains its maximum. Economical use of the means of production, first systematically carried out in the factory system and coinciding there, from the very beginning, with the most reckless squandering of labour-power, and the theft of the normal requirements for the labour-function, now, in a given branch of industry, turns uppermost its antagonistic and murderous side; and the less the social productivity of labour and the technical basis for the combination of labour processes are developed in that branch, the more does the murderous side of this economy emerge. (c) Modern Manufacture      I shall now illustrate the principles laid down above with a few examples. As a matter of fact, the reader is already familiar with a whole mass of instances given in the chapter on the working day. In the hardware manufactures of Birmingham and the neighbourhood, there are employed, mostly in very heavy work, 30, children and young persons, besides 10, women. They are to be found in a range of unhealthy jobs: in brass-foundries, button factories, and enamelling, galvanizing and lacquering works. Owing to the excessive labour performed by their workers, both adult and non-adult, certain London firms where newspapers and books are printed have gained for themselves the honourable name of ‘slaughter-houses’. Similar excesses occur in book-binding, where the victims are chiefly women, girls and children; young persons have to do heavy work in rope-works, and night-work in salt mines, candle factories and chemical works; young people are worked to death at turning the looms in silk weaving, when it is not carried on by machinery. One of the most shameful, dirtiest and worst paid jobs, a kind of labour on which women and young girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags. It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its own immense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the whole world. The rags flow in from Japan, from the most remote countries of South America, and from the Canary Islands. But the chief sources of supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Belgium and Holland. They are used for manure, for making bed-flocks, for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper. The rag-sorters are carriers for the spread of small-pox and other infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims. A classic example of over-work, of hard and unsuitable labour, and of its brutalizing effects on the worker from his childhood upwards, is afforded not only by coal-mining and mining in general, but also by tile and brick making, in which industry the recently invented machinery is, in England, used only here and there. Between May and September the work lasts from 5 in the morning till 8 in the evening, and where the drying is done in the open air, it often lasts from 4 in the morning till 9 in the evening. Work from 5 in the morning till 7 in the evening is considered ‘reduced’ and ‘moderate’. Boys and girls of 6 and even 4 years of age are employed. They work for the same number of hours as the adults, often longer. The work is hard and the summer heat increases the exhaustion. In a brickfield at Moxley, for example, a young woman ( years old) was in the habit of making 2, bricks a day, with the assistance of two little girls who carried the clay for her and stacked the bricks. Every day these girls carried 10 tons up the slippery sides of the clay pits, from a depth of 30 feet, and then for a distance of 210 feet. ‘It is almost impossible as things are for a child to pass through the ordeal of a brickfield without great moral degradation… the low language, which they are accustomed to hear from their tenderest years, the filthy, indecent, and shameless habits, amidst which, unknowing, and half wild, they grow up, make them in after-life lawless, abandoned, dissolute… A frightful source of demoralization is the mode of living. Each moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and the chief of a group, supplies his seven subordinates with board and lodging in his cottage. Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys and girls all sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exceptionally three rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated. These people are so exhausted after the day’s hard work, that neither the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed. Many of these cottages are models of untidiness, dirt, and dust… The greatest evil of the system that employs young girls on this sort of work, consists in this, that, as a rule, it chains them fast from childhood for the whole of their after-life to the most abandoned rabble. They become rough, foulmouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that they are women. Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked far above the knees, hair and face besmeared with dirt, they learn to treat all feelings of decency and shame with contempt. During meal-times they lie at full length in the fields, or watch the boys bathing in a neighbouring canal. Their heavy day’s work at length completed, they put on better clothes, and accompany the men to the public houses.’ That excessive drunkenness is prevalent from childhood upwards among the whole of this class, is only natural. ‘The worst is that the brickmakers despair of themselves. You might as well, said one of the better kind to a chaplain of the Southall fields, try to raise and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!’    There is a rich collection of official material to be found in the fourth and sixth Public Health Reports ( and 1864) on the way in which capital economizes on the requirements for labour in modern manufacture (in which I include all workshops on a large scale, except factories proper). The descriptions of the workshops, more especially those of the London printers and tailors, surpass the most loathsome fantasies of the novelists. The effect on the health of the workers is self-evident. Dr Simon, the chief medical officer of the Privy Council and the official editor of the Public Health Reports, says among other things: ‘In my fourth report (1861) [published 1862] I showed, how it is practically impossible for the work-people to insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, viz., the right that, no matter what the work for which their employer brings them together, the labour, so far as it depends upon him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. I pointed out, that while the workpeople are practically incapable of doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are unable to obtain any effective support from the paid administrations of the sanitary policy… The life of myriads of workmen and workwomen is now uselessly tortured and shortened by the never-ending physical suffering that their mere occupation begets,’ In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the state of health, Dr Simon gives the following table of mortality. (d) Modern Domestic Industry      I now come to so-called domestic industry. In order to get an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts its exploitation against the background of large-scale industry, one might well look, for instance, at the apparently idyllic trade of nail-making, carried on in a few remote villages of England. Here, however, it will be enough to give a few examples from industries, some of whose branches are either not yet carried on with the aid of machinery, or do not as yet compete against machine and factory products: lace-making and straw-plaiting. Of the 150, persons employed in England in the production of lace, about 10, fall within the sphere of the Factory Act of 1861. Almost the whole of the remaining 140, are women, young persons, and children of both sexes, although the male sex is only weakly represented here. The state of health of this ‘cheap’ material for exploitation can be seen from the following table, worked out by Dr Trueman, physician to the Nottingham General Dispensary. Out of 686 female patients who were lace-makers, most of them between the ages of 17 and 24, the proportion of consumptives was:    1852 – 1 in 45          1857 – 1 in 13    1853 – 1 in 28          1858 – 1 in 15    1854 – 1 in 17          1859 – 1 in 9    1855 – lin 18          1860 – lin 8    1856 – 1 in 15          1861 – 1 in 881    This advance in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most optimistic advocate of progress, or for the most mendacious free-trade bagman in Germany. The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, in so far as it is done by machinery, and it is done by machinery as a rule in England. The branches we are about to examine, solely with regard to those who work at home, and are not concentrated in workshops or warehouses, fall into two categories, namely (1) finishing, and (2) mending. The former gives the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and includes numerous subdivisions. The lace finishing is done either in what are called ‘mistresses’ houses’, or by women in their own houses, with or without the help of their children. The women who keep the ‘mistresses’ houses’ are themselves poor. The workroom is in a private house. The mistresses take orders from manufacturers, or from warehousemen, and employ as many women, girls and young children as the size of their rooms and the fluctuating demand of the business will allow. The number of women employed in these workrooms varies from twenty to forty in some, and from ten to twenty in others. The average age at which the children start work is 6 years, but in many cases it is below 5. The usual working hours are from 8 in the morning until 8 in the evening, with 1 1/ hours for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, and often in the stinking workrooms. When business is brisk, the labour frequently lasts from 8 or even 6 o’clock in the morning until 10, or 12 o’clock at night. In English barracks the regulation space allotted to each soldier is 500 to 600 cubic feet, and in the military hospitals 1, cubic feet. But in those finishing sties there are between 67 and 100 cubic feet for each person. At the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights. In order to keep the lace clean, the children are often compelled to pull off their shoes, even in winter, although the floor is tiled or flagged. ‘It is not at all uncommon in Nottingham to find fourteen to twenty children huddled together in a small room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet square, and employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself is exhausting, from its weariness and monotony, and is besides carried on under every possible unwholesome condition… Even the very youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever giving their fingers rest or slowing their motion. If a question is asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing a single moment.’ The ‘long cane’ is increasingly used as a stimulant by the mistresses as the working hours drag towards their close. ‘The children gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupation that is monotonous, eye-straining, and exhausting from the uniformity in the posture of the body. Their work is like slavery.’ When women and their children work at home, which nowadays means in a hired room, often in a garret, their situation is, if that is possible, still worse. This sort of work is given out within a radius of 80 miles from Nottingham. On leaving the warehouse at 9 or 10 o’clock at night, the children are often given a bundle of lace to take home with them and finish. The pharisee of a capitalist, represented by one of his paid lackeys, accompanies this action, of course, with the unctuous phrase ‘That’s for mother’, yet he knows very well that the poor children must sit up and help. Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two agricultural districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending from 20 to 30 miles along the south coast of Devonshire, and including a few places in North Devon; the other comprising a great part of the counties of Buckingham, Bedford and Northampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and Huntingdonshire. The cottages of the agricultural labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on. Many manufacturers employ upwards of 3, of these lace-makers, who are chiefly children and young persons, and always female. The conditions we have just described for the lace-finishing trade also prevail here, except that instead of the ‘mistresses’ houses’ we find what are called ‘lace-schools’ kept by poor women in their cottages. From their fifth year and often earlier, until their twelfth or fifteenth year, the children work in these schools; during the first year the very young ones work from four to eight hours, and later on, from six in the morning till eight and ten o’clock at night. ‘These rooms are generally the living rooms of small cottages, with the fireplace stopped up to prevent draught, and sometimes even in winter, the animal heat of the inmates being thought sufficient; in other cases, they are small pantry-like rooms without any fireplaces… The crowding in these rooms and the foulness of air produced by it are sometimes extreme. Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages.’ With regard to space: ‘In one lace-school eighteen girls and a mistress, 33 cubic feet to each person; in another, where the smell was unbearable, eighteen persons and 24 1/ cubic feet per head. In this industry are to be found employed children of 2 and 2 1/ years.’    Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertfordshire and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. In 1861, there were 40, persons employed in straw-plaiting and straw-hat making; of these, 3, were males of all ages, the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 7, children, were under 20 years of age. In the place of the lace-schools we find here the ‘straw-plait schools’. The children generally start to be instructed in straw-plaiting at the age of 4, often between 3 and 4 years. They get no education, of course. The children themselves call the elementary schools ‘natural schools’, distinguishing them in this way from these blood-sucking institutions, in which they are kept at work simply to get through the task, generally 30 yards a day, which is prescribed by their half-starved mothers. These same mothers often make them work at home, after school is over, till 10, 11 and 12 o’clock at night. The straw cuts their mouths, with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. Dr Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the whole body of medical officers in London that 300 cubic feet is the minimum space proper for each person in a bedroom or workroom. But in the straw-plait schools space is more sparingly allotted than in the lace-schools, ‘ 1/37, 18 1/ 1/ and below 22 cubic feet for each person’. The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commissioners, Mr White, represents less space than the half of what a child would occupy if packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction. Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. The wretched half-starved parents think of nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children. The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, and naturally so, for their parents, and leave them. ‘It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population so brought up… Their morality is at the lowest ebb… a great number of the women have illegitimate children, and that at such an immature age that even those most conversant with criminal statistics are astounded.’ And the native land of these model families is itself the model Christian country in Europe; at least, this is what Count Montalembert says, and he is certainly a competent authority on Christianity! Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the maximum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in rare cases to 3 shillings), are reduced far below their nominal amount by the prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but especially in the lace districts. (e) Transition from Modern Manufacture and Domestic Industry to Large-Scale Industry. The Hastening of this Revolution by the Application of the Factory Acts to those Industries      The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every normal condition needed for working and living, and by the sheer brutality of overwork and night-work, finally comes up against certain insuperable natural obstacles. This is also true of the cheapening of commodities, and of capitalist exploitation in general, which rest on these foundations. When this point has at last been reached – and this takes many years – the hour has struck for the introduction of machinery, and for a thenceforth rapid transformation of the scattered domestic industries, as well as the manufactures, into factory industries. An example of this process, on the most colossal scale, is afforded by the production of ‘wearing apparel’. This industry, according to the classification of the Children’s Employment Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies’-hat makers, cap-makers, tailors, milliners and dressmakers, shirtmakers, corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers, besides many minor branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars, etc. In 1861 the number of females employed in these industries, in England and Wales, amounted to 586,299, of whom 115, at least were under 20, and 16, under 15 years of age. The number of these working women in the United Kingdom in 1861 was 750,334. The number of males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, shoemaking, glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these, 14, were under 15 years, 89, between 15 and 20, and 333, over 20 years. Many of the smaller branches are not included in these figures. But take the figures as they stand; we then have for England and Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total of 1,024, persons, about as many as are taken up by agriculture and cattle-breeding. We begin to understand the purpose for which machinery conjures up such immense quantities of goods, and ‘sets free’ such enormous masses of workers. The production of ‘wearing apparel’ is carried on partly in manufacturing workshops within which there is merely a reproduction of the division of labour whose membra disjecta* were already to hand; partly by small master-craftsmen, who do not, however, work as before for individual consumers, but for factories and warehouses, and to such an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality; finally, on a very large scale, by the so-called domestic workers, who form an external department of the factories and warehouses, and even of the workshops of the smaller masters. The raw material for this labour, either in its raw shape or already semi-fabricated, is supplied by large-scale industry, and the mass of cheap human material (taillable à merci et miséricorde)† consists of the individuals ‘set free’ by large-scale industry and agriculture. The manufactures of this sphere owed their origin chiefly to the capitalists’ need to have at hand an army equipped to respond to any increase in demand. These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to exist as a broad foundation. The great production of surplus-value in these branches of labour, and the progressive cheapening of their articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, which just sufficed for a miserable, vegetable existence, and to the extension of the hours of labour to the maximum endurable by the human organism. It was in fact the cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood which were converted into commodities, which permitted the constant extension of the market; this was especially true of England’s colonial market where, besides, English tastes and habits prevail. At last the critical point was reached. The basis of the old method, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the workers, accompanied by a more or less systematic division of labour, no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still more rapidly extending competition of the capitalists. The hour of the machine had struck. The decisively revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal degree all the innumerable branches of this sphere of production, such as dressmaking, tailoring, shoemaking, sewing, hat-making and so on, is the sewing-machine. Its immediate effect on the workers is like that of all machinery, which, during the epoch of large-scale industry, has seized on new branches of trade. Children who are too young are removed. The wage of those who work with machines rises compared with that of the domestic workers, many of whom belong among the ‘poorest of the poor’. The wage of the better situated handicraftsmen sinks, however, since the machine is in competition with them. The new machine-minders are exclusively girls and young women. With the help of mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the heavier work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old women and very young children. The overpowering competition crushes the weakest manual workers. The fearful increase in death from starvation during the last ten years in London runs parallel with the extension of machine sewing.89The new female workers turn the machines by hand and foot, or by hand alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing, according to the weight, size and special make of the machine, and expend a great deal of labour-power. Their occupation is unwholesome, owing to the long hours, although in most cases these are not so long as under the old system. Wherever the sewing-machine is located in narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwholesome influences. ‘The effect,’ says Mr Lord, ‘of entering a low pitched room where thirty to forty machinists are working under such conditions… is almost overpowering… the heat, partly owing to gas stoves for heating irons, was dreadful… Even when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning till 6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet three or four persons fall into a swoon regularly every day.’    The revolution in the social mode of production which is the necessary product of the revolution in the means of production is accomplished through a variegated medley of transitional forms. These forms vary according to the extent to which the sewing-machine has become prevalent in one branch of industry or the other, the time during which it has been in operation, the previous condition of the workers, the degree to which manufacture, handicrafts or domestic industry preponderates, the level of rent of the workrooms, and so on. In dress-making, for instance, where the labour for the most part was already organized, chiefly by simple co-operation, the sewing-machine at first formed nothing but a fresh element in the already existing system of manufacture. In tailoring, shirtmaking, shoemaking, etc., all the forms are intermingled. Here we see the factory system proper. We see middlemen receiving the raw material from the capitalist en chef, and setting to work at sewing-machines, in ‘chambers’ and ‘garrets’, groups of from ten to fifty or more female workers. Finally, as is always the case with machinery when not organized into a system, and when it can also be used on a very small scale, handicraftsmen and domestic workers, along with their families, or with a little extra labour from outside, make use of their own sewing-machines. The system actually prevalent in England is this: the capitalist concentrates a large number of machines on his premises, and then distributes the product of those machines amongst the domestic workers to work it up into its finished form. The variety of these transitional forms does not, however, conceal the tendency operating to transform them into the factory system proper. This tendency is nurtured by the very nature of the sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which tend to compel the concentration, under one roof and one management, of previously separated branches of a trade. It is also favoured by the circumstance that preparatory needlework and certain other operations are most conveniently done on the premises where the machine is at work, as well as by the inevitable expropriation of the hand sewers, and the domestic workers who work with their own machines. This fate has already in part overtaken them. The constantly increasing amount of capital invested in sewing-machines spurs on the production of machine-made articles and gluts the market with them, thereby signalling to the domestic workers that they must sell their machines. The overproduction of sewing-machines themselves causes their producers, who need to sell at all costs, to let them out for so much a week, thus crushing the small sewing-machine owners by their deadly competition. Constant changes in the construction of the machines, and their ever-increasing cheapness, cause the older makes to depreciate daily and compel their sale in great numbers, at absurd prices, to large capitalists, who are now the only people who can employ them at a profit. Finally, the substitution of the steam-engine for man strikes the final blow in this, as in all similar processes of transformation. Initially the use of steam-power meets with certain technical difficulties, such as unsteadiness in the machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and tear of the lighter machines, etc. But these are all soon overcome by experience. If, on the one hand, the concentration of many machines in large factories leads to the use of steam power, on the other hand the competition of steam with human muscles hastens on the concentration of workers and machines in large factories. Thus England is at present experiencing, not only in the colossal industry of making ‘wearing apparel’, but also in most of the other trades mentioned above, the conversion of manufacture, handicrafts and domestic work into the factory system, after each of those forms of production, totally changed and disorganized under the influence of large-scale industry, has long ago reproduced and even overdone all the horrors of the factory system, without reproducing any of the positive aspects of its development. This industrial revolution, which advances naturally and spontaneously, is also helped on artificially by the extension of the Factory Acts to all industries in which women, young persons and children are employed. The compulsory regulation of the working day, as regards its length, pauses, beginning and end, the introduction of the relay system for children, the exclusion from the factory of all children under a certain age, etc., necessitate on the one hand more machinery and the substitution of steam as a motive power in the place of muscles. On the other hand, in order to make up for the loss of time, an expansion occurs of the means of production used in common, of the furnaces, buildings, etc., in one word, a greater concentration of the means of production and a corresponding increase in the number of workers conglomerated in one place. The chief objection, raised repeatedly and passionately on behalf of each manufacture threatened with the Factory Act, is in fact this, that in order to continue the business on the old scale a greater outlay of capital will be necessary. But, as regards labour in the so-called domestic industries and the intermediate forms between them and manufacture, as soon as limits are set to the working day and to the employment of children, those industries go to the wall. Unlimited exploitation of cheap labour-power is the sole foundation of their ability to compete. One of the essential conditions for the existence of the factory system, especially when the length of the working day is fixed, is certainty in the result, i.e. the production in a given time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful effect. The statutory pauses in the working day, moreover, imply the assumption that periodic and sudden cessations in the work do no harm to the article undergoing the process of production. This certainty in the result, and this possibility of interrupting the work, are of course more easily attained in the purely mechanical industries than in those in which chemical and physical processes play a part; as, for instance, in the earthenware trade, in bleaching, dyeing, baking, and in most of the metallurgical industries. Wherever there is a working day whose length is not restricted, wherever there is night-work and unrestricted waste of human life, there the slightest obstacle presented by the nature of the work to a change for the better is soon looked on as an eternal ‘natural barrier’ inherent in production. No poison kills vermin with more certainty than the Factory Act removes such ‘natural barriers’. No one made a greater outcry over ‘impossibilities’ than the gentlemen who are involved in the manufacture of earthenware. In 1864, however, they were brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every ‘impossibility’ had vanished. ‘The improved method’, called forth by the Act, ‘of making slip by pressure instead of by evaporation, the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, etc., are each events of great importance in the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding century could not rival… It has even considerably reduced the temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware.’ In spite of every prophecy, the cost price of earthenware did not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent that the export for the twelve months ending December 1865 exceeded in value by £138, the average of the preceding three years. In the manufacture of matches it was thought to be an indispensable requirement that boys, even while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches in melted phosphorus, whose poisonous vapour rose into their faces. The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping machine, whose vapour could not come into contact with the workers. Similarly, at the present time, in those branches of lace manufacture not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that meal-times cannot be regular owing to the different periods required by the various kinds of lace for drying, periods which vary from three minutes to up to an hour and more. To this the Children’s Employment Commissioners answer: ‘The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt with in our first report. Some of the principal manufacturers in the trade urged that, in consequence of the nature of the materials used, and their various processes, they would be unable, without serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given moment. But it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous arrangement, the apprehended difficulty could be got over; and accordingly by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts Extension Act passed during this Session of Parliament, an interval of eighteen months is given to them, from the passing of the Act, before they are required to conform to the meal hours specified by the Factory Acts.’ The Act had hardly received the sanction of Parliament when the manufacturers also discovered this: ‘The inconveniences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not arisen. We do not find the production at all interfered with; in short we produce more in the same time.’ It is evident that the British Parliament, which no one will reproach with being excessively endowed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclusion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away all the so-called impediments opposed by the nature of the process to the restriction and regulation of the working day. Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given industry, a period varying from six to eighteen months is fixed within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove all technical impediments to the working of the Act. Mirabeau’s ‘Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bête de mot!’* is particularly applicable to modern technology. But though the Factory Acts thus artificially ripen the material elements necessary for the conversion of the manufacturing system into the factory system, yet at the same time, because they make it necessary to lay out a greater amount of capital, they hasten the decline of the small masters, and the concentration of capital. Apart from the purely technical impediments, which can be removed by technical means, the irregular habits of the workers themselves obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour. This is especially the case where piece-wages predominate, and where loss of time in one part of the day or week can be made good by subsequent overtime or by night-work, a process which brutalizes the adult worker and ruins his wife and children. Although this absence of regularity in the expenditure of labour-power is a natural and crudely spontaneous reaction against the tedium of monotonous drudgery, it also originates, and to a much greater degree, from the anarchy in production itself, an anarchy that in its turn presupposes unbridled exploitation of labour-power by the capitalist. Alongside the general and periodic changes in the industrial cycle, and the special fluctuations in the markets to which each industry is subject, we may also reckon what is called ‘the season’, dependent either on the periodicity of favourable seasons of the year for navigation, or on fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to be executed in the shortest possible time. The habit of giving such orders becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and telegraphs. ‘The extension of the railway system throughout the country has tended very much to encourage giving short notice. Purchasers now come up from Glasgow, Manchester, and Edinburgh once every fortnight or so to the wholesale city warehouses which we supply, and give small orders requiring immediate execution, instead of buying from stock as they used to do. Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times so as to meet the demand of the next season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be in demand then.’    In factories and places of manufacture which are not yet subject to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails periodically during what is called the season, as a result of sudden orders. In the outside departments of factory, workshop and warehouse, the so-called domestic workers, whose employment is at best irregular, are entirely dependent for their raw material and their orders on the caprice of the capitalist, who, in this industry, is not hampered by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machinery, and risks nothing by a stoppage of work but the skin of the worker himself. Here then he sets himself systematically to work to form an industrial reserve force that shall be ready at a moment’s notice; during one part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman toil, during the other part he lets it starve for lack of work. ‘Employers… avail themselves of the habitual irregularity [in work at home] when any extra work is wanted at a push, so that work goes on till 11 and 12 p.m., or 2 a.m., or as the usual phrase is, “all hours”,’ and in places where ‘the stench is enough to knock you down; you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but shudder to go further’. ‘They are curious men,’ said one of the witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of the masters, ‘and think it does a boy no harm to work too hard for half the year, if he is nearly idle for the other half.’    Like the technical impediments, these ‘usages which have grown with the growth of trade’, or business customs, were also proclaimed by interested capitalists (and still are proclaimed) to be ‘natural barriers’ inherent in production. This was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time when they were first threatened with the Factory Acts. Although their industry depends, more than any other, on the world market, and therefore on shipping, experience showed they were lying. Since then, every pretended ‘obstruction to business’ has been treated by the Factory Inspectors as a mere sham. The thoroughly conscientious investigations of the Children’s Employment Commission prove that the effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some industries, was to spread the mass of labour previously employed more evenly over the whole year; that this regulation was the first rational bridle on the murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion, caprices which fit in very badly with the system under which large-scale industry operates; that the development of ocean navigation and of the means of communication in general has destroyed the actual technical foundation of seasonal labour, and that all other so-called uncontrollable circumstances are swept away by the increased size of the buildings, the additional machinery, the increased number of workers employed simultaneously, and the automatic impact of all these changes on the mode of conducting the wholesale trade. But for all that, capital never becomes reconciled to such changes – and this is admitted over and over again by its own representatives – except ‘under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament’ for the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour. 9. THE HEALTH AND EDUCATION CLAUSES OF THE FACTORY ACTS. THE GENERAL EXTENSION OF FACTORY LEGISLATION IN ENGLAND      Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical reaction of society against the spontaneously developed form of its production process, is, as we have seen, just as much the necessary product of large-scale industry as cotton yarn, self-actors and the electric telegraph. Before we go on to consider the extension of that legislation in England, we shall briefly notice certain clauses contained in the Factory Acts which do not relate to the hours of work. Quite apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the capitalist to evade them, the clauses relating to health are extremely meagre, and in fact limited to provisions for whitewashing the walls, for insuring cleanliness in some other matters, for ventilation and for protection against dangerous machinery. We shall return again in Volume 3* to the fanatical opposition of the manufacturers to those clauses which imposed on them a slight expenditure on appliances for protecting the arms and legs of their ‘hands’. Here is yet another dazzling vindication of the free-trade dogma that, in a society of mutually antagonistic interests, each individual furthers the common welfare by seeking his own personal advantage! One example will suffice. It is a well-known fact that during the last twenty years the flax industry has expanded considerably, and that, with that expansion, the number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased. In 1864 there were in that country 1, of these mills. Regularly, in autumn and winter, women and ‘young persons’, the wives, sons and daughters of the neighbouring small farmers, a class of people entirely unaccustomed to machinery, are taken from field labour to feed the rollers of the scutching mills with flax. The accidents, both as regards number and kind, are wholly unparalleled in the history of machinery. In one scutching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, there occurred between 1852 and 1856 six fatal accidents and sixty mutilations. Every one of these might have been prevented by the simplest appliances, costing a few shillings. Dr W. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at Downpatrick, states in his official report, dated 15 December 1865: ‘The serious accidents at the scutching mills are of the most fearful nature. In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the trunk, and either involves death or a future of wretched incapacity and suffering. The increase of mills in the country will of course extend these dreadful results, and it will be a great boon if they are brought under the legislature. I am convinced that by proper supervision of scutching mills a vast sacrifice of life and limb would be averted.’    What could be more characteristic of the capitalist mode of production than the fact that it is necessary, by Act of Parliament, to force upon the capitalists the simplest appliances for maintaining cleanliness and health? In the potteries the Factory Act of 1864 ‘has whitewashed and cleansed upwards of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from any such cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some entirely’ (this is the ‘abstinence’ of the capitalist! ), ‘in which were employed 27, artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and often nights of labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which rendered an otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation, pregnant with disease and death. The Act has improved the ventilation very much.’ At the same time, this part of the Act strikingly demonstrates that the capitalist mode of production, by its very nature, excludes all rational improvement beyond a certain point. It has been repeatedly noted that the English doctors are unanimous in declaring that where the work is continuous 500 cubic feet is the very smallest space that should be allowed for each person. Now, just as the Factory Acts, owing to their compulsory provisions, indirectly hasten the conversion of small workshops into factories, thus indirectly attacking the proprietary rights of the smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly to the big ones, so too, in the same way, thousands of small employers would be expropriated directly, at a single stroke, if it were made obligatory to provide the proper space for each worker in each workshop. This would strike at the very roots of the capitalist mode of production, i.e. the self-valorization of capital, whether on a small or a large scale, by means of the ‘free’ purchase and consumption of labour-power. Factory legislation is therefore brought to a dead halt before these 500 cubic feet of breathing space. The health officers, the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all repeat, over and over again, that it is both necessary for the workers to have these 500 cubic feet, and impossible to impose this rule on capital. They are, in reality, declaring that consumption and the other pulmonary diseases of the workers are conditions necessary to the existence of capital. Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the whole, they do proclaim that elementary education is a compulsory precondition for the employment of children. The success of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of combining education and gymnastics with manual labour, and consequently of combining manual labour with education and gymnastics. The factory inspectors soon found out, by questioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although they received only one half the education of the regular day students, yet learnt quite as much and often more. ‘This can be accounted for by the simple fact that, with only being at school for one half of the day, they are always fresh, and nearly always ready and willing to receive instruction. The system on which they work, half manual labour, and half school, renders each employment a rest and a relief to the other; consequently, both are far more congenial to the child, than would be the case were he kept constantly at one. It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who comes fresh and bright from his work.’ Further evidence of this will be found in Senior’s speech at the Social Science Congress at Edinburgh in 1863. He shows there, amongst other things, how the monotonous, unproductive and long school day undergone by the children of the upper and middle classes uselessly adds to the labour of the teacher, ‘while he not only fruitlessly but absolutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, and energy of the children’. As Robert Owen has shown us in detail, the germ of the education of the future is present in the factory system; this education will, in the case of every child over a given age, combine productive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the only method of producing fully developed human beings. As we have seen, large-scale industry sweeps away by technical means the division of labour characteristic of manufacture, under which each man is bound hand and foot for life to a single specialized operation. At the same time, the capitalist form of large-scale industry reproduces this same division of labour in a still more monstrous shape; in the factory proper, by converting the worker into a living appendage of the machine; and everywhere outside the factory by the sporadic use of machinery and machine workers, or by the introduction of the labour of women, children and unskilled men as a new foundation for the division of labour. The contradiction between the division of labour under manufacture and the essential character of large-scale industry makes itself forcibly felt. It appears, for example, in the frightful fact that a great part of the children employed in modern factories and manufactures are from their earliest years riveted to the most simple manipulations, and exploited for years, without being taught a single kind of skill that would afterwards make them of use, even in the same factory. In the English letter-press printing trade, for example, there formerly existed a system, corresponding to that in the old manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to more and more difficult work. They went through a course of teaching till they were finished printers. To be able to read and write was for every one of them a requirement of their trade. All this was changed by the printing machine. It employs two sorts of worker. On the one hand there are adults, tenters, and on the other hand there are boys, mostly from 11 to 17 years of age, whose sole occupation is either to spread the sheets of paper under the machine, or to take from it the printed sheets. They perform this weary task, in London especially, for 14, 15 and 16 hours at a stretch, during several days in the week, and frequently for 36 hours, with only 2 hours’ rest for meals and sleep. A great proportion of them cannot read, and they are, as a rule, utter savages and very extraordinary creatures. ‘To qualify them for the work which they have to do they require no intellectual training; there is little room in it for skill, and less for judgement; their wages, though rather high for boys, do not increase proportionately as they grow up, and the majority of them cannot look for advancement to the better paid and more responsible post of machine minder, because, while each machine has but one minder, it has at least two, and often four boys attached to it.’ As soon as they get too old for such children’s work, that is at about 17 years old, at the latest, they are discharged from the printing establishments. They become recruits for crime. Attempts to procure them employment elsewhere come to grief owing to their ignorance and brutality, their mental and bodily degradation. What is true of the division of labour within the workshop under the system of manufacture is also true of the division of labour within society. As long as handicrafts and manufacture form the universal basis of social production, the subjection of the producer to a single branch, the breaking-up of the originally multifarious parts of his employment, is a necessary aspect of the process of development. It is on that basis that each separate branch of production acquires its technically appropriate shape empirically, and slowly perfects it. Then, as soon as a particular degree of maturity has been reached, it rapidly crystallizes. Once this has happened, the only thing that here and there gives rise to a change, apart from the provision of new materials for labour through the medium of trade, is the gradual alteration of the instruments of labour. But their form, too, once it has been definitively laid down by experience, undergoes a process of petrifaction, as is proved by their frequent transmission from one generation to another, unaltered, through thousands of years. It is characteristic of this situation that, right down to the eighteenth century, the different trades were called ‘mysteries’ (mystères), into whose secrets none but those initiated by their profession and their practical experience could penetrate. Large-scale industry tore aside the veil that concealed from men their own social process of production and turned the various spontaneously divided branches of production into riddles, not only to outsiders but even to the initiated. Its principle, which is to view each process of production in and for itself, and to resolve it into its constituent elements without looking first at the ability of the human hand to perform the new processes, brought into existence the whole of the modern science of technology. The varied, apparently unconnected and petrified forms of the social production process were now dissolved into conscious and planned applications of natural science, divided up systematically in accordance with the particular useful effect aimed at in each case. Similarly, technology discovered the few grand fundamental forms of motion which, despite all the diversity of the instruments used, apply necessarily to every productive action of the human body, just as the science of mechanics is not misled by the immense complication of modern machinery into viewing this as anything other than the constant re-appearance of the same simple mechanical processes. Modern industry never views or treats the existing form of a production process as the definitive one. Its technical basis is therefore revolutionary, whereas all earlier modes of production were essentially conservative. By means of machinery, chemical processes and other methods, it is continually transforming not only the technical basis of production but also the functions of the worker and the social combinations of the labour process. At the same time, it thereby also revolutionizes the division of labour within society, and incessantly throws masses of capital and of workers from one branch of production to another. Thus large-scale industry, by its very nature, necessitates variation of labour, fluidity of functions, and mobility of the worker in all directions. But on the other hand, in its capitalist form it reproduces the old division of labour with its ossified particularities. We have seen how this absolute contradiction* does away with all repose, all fixity and all security as far as the worker’s life-situation is concerned; how it constantly threatens, by taking away the instruments of labour, to snatch from his hands the means of subsistence, and, by suppressing his specialized function, to make him superfluous. We have seen, too, how this contradiction bursts forth without restraint in the ceaseless human sacrifices required from the working class, in the reckless squandering of labour-powers, and in the devastating effects of social anarchy. This is the negative side. But if, at present, variation of labour imposes itself after the manner of an overpowering natural law, and with the blindly destructive action of a natural law that meets with obstacles everywhere, large-scale industry, through its very catastrophes, makes the recognition of variation of labour and hence of the fitness of the worker for the maximum number of different kinds of labour into a question of life and death. This possibility of varying labour must become a general law of social production, and the existing relations must be adapted to permit its realization in practice. That monstrosity, the disposable working population held in reserve, in misery, for the changing requirements of capitalist exploitation, must be replaced by the individual man who is absolutely available for the different kinds of labour required of him; the partially developed individual, who is merely the bearer of one specialized social function, must be replaced by the totally developed individual, for whom the different social functions are different modes of activity he takes up in turn. One aspect of this process of transformation, which has developed spontaneously from the foundation provided by large-scale industry, is the establishment of technical and agricultural schools. Another is the foundation of ‘écoles d’enseignement professionel,*in which the children of the workers receive a certain amount of instruction in technology and in the practical handling of the various implements of labour. Though the Factory Act, that first and meagre concession wrung from capital, is limited to combining elementary education with work in the factory, there can be no doubt that, with the inevitable conquest of political power by the working class, technological education, both theoretical and practical, will take its proper place in the schools of the workers. There is also no doubt that those revolutionary ferments whose goal is the abolition of the old division of labour stand in diametrical contradiction with the capitalist form of production, and the economic situation of the workers which corresponds to that form. However, the development of the contradictions of a given historical form of production is the only historical way in which it can be dissolved and then reconstructed on a new basis. ‘Ne sutor ultra crepidam’,† a phrase which was the absolute summit of handicraft wisdom, became sheer nonsense from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the steam-engine, the barber Arkwright the throstle and the jeweller Fulton the steamship. As long as factory legislation is confined to regulating the labour done in factories, etc., it is regarded only as an interference with capital’s rights of exploitation. But when it comes to regulating so-called ‘domestic labour’, this is immediately viewed as a direct attack on the patria potestas, or, in modern terms, parental authority. The tender-hearted English Parliament long affected to shrink from taking this step. The power of facts, however, at last compelled it to acknowledge that large-scale industry, in overturning the economic foundation of the old family system, and the family labour corresponding to it, had also dissolved the old family relationships. The rights of the children had to be proclaimed. The concluding report of the Children’s Employment Commission, published in 1866, says: ‘It is, unhappily, to a painful degree apparent throughout the whole of the evidence, that against no persons do the children of both sexes so much require protection as against their parents.’ The system of unlimited exploitation of children’s labour in general and so-called domestic labour in particular is ‘maintained only because the parents are able, without check or control, to exercise this arbitrary and mischievous power over their young and tender offspring… Parents must not possess the absolute power of making ther children mere machines to earn so much weekly wage… The children and young persons, therefore, in all such cases may justifiably claim from the legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption should be secured to them, from what destroys prematurely their physical strength, and lowers them in the scale of intellectual and moral beings.’ It was not however the misuse of parental power that created the direct or indirect exploitation of immature labour-powers by capital, but rather the opposite, i.e. the capitalist mode of exploitation, by sweeping away the economic foundation which corresponded to parental power, made the use of parental power into its misuse. However terrible and disgusting the dissolution of the old family ties within the capitalist system may appear, large-scale industry, by assigning an important part in socially organized processes of production, outside the sphere of the domestic economy, to women, young persons and children of both sexes, does nevertheless create a new economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of relations between the sexes. It is of course just as absurd to regard the Christian-Germanic form of the family as absolute and final as it would have been in the case of the ancient Roman, the ancient Greek or the Oriental forms, which, moreover, form a series in historical development. It is also obvious that the fact that the collective working group is composed of individuals of both sexes and all ages must under the appropriate conditions turn into a source of humane development, although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalist form, the system works in the opposite direction, and becomes a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery, since here the worker exists for the process of production, and not the process of production for the worker. The necessity for a generalization of the Factory Acts, for transforming them from exceptional laws relating to mechanical spinning and weaving – those first creations of machinery – into the general law for all social production, arose, as we have seen, from the path of historical development taken by large-scale industry, for, in its wake, the traditional shape of manufacture, handicrafts and domestic industry is entirely revolutionized; manufactures are constantly passing over into the factory system, and handicrafts into manufactures; and, at the end, the spheres of handicrafts and domestic industry become, in what is relatively an amazingly short time, dens of misery where capitalist exploitation is given free rein to commit the most frightful iniquities. There are two circumstances which finally turn the scale: first, the constantly recurring experience that as soon as capital is subjected to state control, even at a handful of points on the periphery of society, it seeks compensation all the more unrestrainedly at all other points; and second, the cry of the capitalists for equality in the conditions of competition, i.e. for equality of restraint on the exploitation of labour. Let us listen to two heartfelt outpourings on this matter. Messrs W. Cooksley of Bristol, nail and chain manufacturers, voluntarily introduced the regulations of the Factory Acts into their business. ‘As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the Messrs Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their boys enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p.m. “This”, they naturally say, “is an injustice and loss to us, as it exhausts a portion of the boy’s strength of which we ought to have the full benefit.”’ Mr J. Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, of London) states before the commissioners of the Children’s Employment Commission: ‘He would sign any petition for it’ (legislative intervention)… ‘As it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his place, lest others should be working later than him and getting away his orders.’ Summing up, the commissioners declare: ‘It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories should be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour in the small places in their own branch of business were under no legislative restriction. And to the injustice arising from the unfair conditions of competition, in regard to hours, that would be created if the smaller places of work were exempt, would be added the disadvantage to the larger manufacturers of finding their supply of juvenile and female labour drawn off to the places of work exempt from legislation. Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the smaller places of work, which are almost invariably the least favourable to the health, comfort, education, and general improvement of the people.’    In its concluding report, the Children’s Employment Commission proposes to subject to the Factory Act more than 1,400, children, young persons and women, of whom about one-half are exploited in small industries and in so-called domestic labour. It says this: ‘But if it should seem fit to Parliament to place the whole of that large number of children, young persons and females under the protective legislation above adverted to it cannot be doubted that such legislation would have a most beneficent effect, not only upon the young and the feeble who are its more immediate objects, but upon the still larger body of adult workers who would, in all those employments, both directly and indirectly, come immediately under its influence. It would enforce upon them regular and moderate hours; it would lead to their places of work being kept in a healthy and cleanly state; it would therefore husband and improve that store of physical strength on which their own well-being and that of the country so much depends; it would save the rising generation from that over-exertion at an early age which undermines their constitutions and leads to premature decay; finally, it would ensure them – at least up to the age of 13 – the opportunity of receiving the elements of education, and would put an end to that utter ignorance… which – as faithfully exhibited in the Reports of our Assistant Commissioners – cannot be regarded without the deepest pain, and a profound sense of national humiliation.’    The Tory government announced on 5 February 1867, in the Speech from the Throne, that it had incorporated the proposals of the Children’s Employment Commission into Bills. To get that far, an extra twenty years of experimenta in corpore vili* had been required. Already in 1840 a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry into child labour had been appointed. Its report, issued in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W. Senior, ‘the most frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and cruelty on the part of masters and parents, and of juvenile and infantile misery, degradation and destruction ever presented… It may be supposed that it describes the horrors of a past age. But there is unhappily evidence that those horrors continue as intense as they were. A pamphlet [on the Lace Trade and Factory Act] published by Hard-wicke in 1860 states that the abuses complained of in 1842 are in full bloom at the present day [1863]. It is a strange proof of the general neglect of the morals and health of the children of the working class, that this report lay unnoticed for twenty years, during which the children, “bred up without the remotest sign of comprehension as to what is meant by the term morals, who had neither knowledge, nor religion, nor natural affection”, were allowed to become the parents of the present generation.’    In the meantime, the social situation had undergone a change. * Parliament did not dare to shelve the demands of the Commission of 1862 as it had done those of the Commission of 1840. Hence, in 1864, when the Commission had not yet published more than a part of its reports, the earthenware industries (including the potteries), the manufacture of wallpaper, matches, cartridges, and percussion caps, and the cutting of fustian were placed under the Acts in force in the textile industry. It was then that the Tory government which was now in power announced, in the Speech from the Throne, the introduction of further Bills, founded on the final recommendations of the Commission, which had completed its labours in 1866. The Factory Acts Extension Act received the royal assent on 15 August 1867, the Workshops Regulation Act on 21 August 1867; the first Act regulated the large industries, the second the small. The Factory Acts Extension Act applies to blast-furnaces, iron and copper mills, foundries, machine shops, metal works, gutta-percha works, paper-mills, glass-works, tobacco factories, letterpress printing works, book-binding works, in short to all industrial establishments of this kind, in which fifty individuals or more are occupied simultaneously, and for not less than 100 days a year. To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the Workshops Regulation Act in its application, we shall cite the definitions it lays down:    ‘Handicraft shall mean any manual labour exercised by way of trade, or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the making any article or part of an article, or in, or incidental to, the altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise adapting for sale any article.’    ‘Workshop shall mean any room or place whatever in the open air or under cover, in which any handicraft is carried on by any child, young person, or woman, and to which and over which the person by whom such child, young person, or woman is employed, has the right of access and control.’    ‘Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether for wages or not, under a master or under a parent as herein defined.’    ‘Parent shall mean parent, guardian, or person, having the custody of, or control over, any… child or young person.’    Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for the employment of children, young persons and women in contravention of the provisions of the Act, lays down fines, not only for the occupier of the workshop, whether a parent or not, but also for ‘the parent of, or the person deriving any direct benefit from the labour of, or having the control over, the child, young person or woman’. The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large establishments, regresses from the Factory Act by a mass of vicious exceptions and cowardly compromises with the masters. The Workshops Regulation Act, wretched as far as its detailed provisions were concerned, remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local authorities who were charged with its execution. When in 1871, Parliament withdrew this power from them, in order to confer it on the factory inspectors, to whose province it thus added at a single stroke more than 100, workshops, as well as 300 brickworks, care was taken at the same time not to add more than eight assistants to their already undermanned staff. What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, on the one hand, the necessity imposed on the Parliament of the ruling classes of adopting, in principle, such extraordinary and extensive measures against the excesses of capitalist exploitation; and, on the other hand, the hesitation, the unwillingness and the bad faith with which it actually put these measures into practice. The 1862 Inquiry Commission also proposed a renewed regulation of the mining industry,* an industry distinguished from all others by the fact that in it the interests of the landowner and the capitalist coincide. The antagonism between these two interests had been favourable to factory legislation, and the absence of that antagonism is sufficient to explain the delays and the chicanery surrounding the legislation on mines. The 1840 Inquiry Commission had made revelations so terrible and shocking, and created such a scandal throughout Europe, that to salve its conscience Parliament passed the Mining Act of 1842. But this did no more than forbid the employment underground of children under 10 years of age and of females. Then, in 1860, there came the Mines Inspection Act, which provides that mines shall be inspected by public officials appointed specially for that purpose, and that boys between the ages of 10 and 12 years shall not be employed, unless they have a school certificate, or go to school for a certain number of hours. This Act was a complete dead letter, owing to the ridiculously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed. One of the most recent Blue Books on mines is the Report from the Select Committee on Mines, together with… Evidence, 23 July 1866. This is the work of a Parliamentary Committee selected from members of the House of Commons, and authorized to summon and examine witnesses. It is a thick folio volume, but the Report itself occupies only five lines, to this effect; the committee has nothing to say, and more witnesses must be examined! The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the cross-examination of witnesses in English courts of justice, where the advocate tries, by means of impudent, confusing and unexpected questions, to intimidate and confound the witness, and to give a forced meaning to the answers thus extorted. In this inquiry the members of the committee themselves are the cross-examiners, and among them are to be found both mine-owners and mine-exploiters; the witnesses are mining workers, mostly coal miners. The whole farce is too characteristic of the spirit of capital not to call for a few extracts from this Report. For the sake of conciseness, I have classified them under headings. I should also add that every question and its obligatory answer are numbered in the English Blue Books, and that the witnesses whose depositions are cited here are all workers in coal mines. 1. Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards. In the mines the work, including the obligatory journey to and from the mine, usually lasts 14 or 15 hours, in exceptional cases even longer, from 3, and 5 a.m. until 5 and 6 p.m. in the evening (n. 6,452, 83). The adults work in two shifts, of 8 hours each; but there is no such alternation with the boys, on account of the expense (n. 80, 203, 204). The younger boys are chiefly employed in opening and shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts of the mine; the older ones are employed on heavier work, in carrying coal, etc. (n. 122, 739, 740). They work these long hours underground until their 18th or 22nd year, when they are put to miner’s work proper (n. 161). Children and young persons are at present worse treated and harder worked than at any previous period (n. 1663-7). The miners almost unanimously demand an Act of Parliament prohibiting the employment of children under 14 in mines. And now Hussey Vivian (himself a mine-owner) asks: ‘Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the workman’s family?’ Mr Bruce: ‘Do you not think it would be a very hard case, where a parent had been injured, or where he was sickly, or where a father was dead, and there was only a mother, to prevent a child between 12 and 14 earning 1s. 7d. a day for the good of the family?… You must lay down a general rule?… Are you prepared to recommend legislation which would prevent the employment of children under 12 and 14, whatever the state of their parents might be?’ ‘Yes’ (n. 107–10). Vivian: ‘Supposing that an enactment were passed preventing the employment of children under the age of 14, would it not be probable that… the parents of children would seek employment for their children in other directions, for instance, in manufacture?’ ‘Not generally I think’ (n. 174). Kinnaird: ‘Some of the boys are keepers of doors?’ ‘Yes’. ‘Is there not generally a very great draught every time you open a door or close it?’ ‘Yes, generally there is.’ ‘It sounds a very easy thing, but it is in fact rather a painful one?’ ‘He is imprisoned there just the same as if he was in a cell of a gaol.’ Bourgeois Vivian: ‘Whenever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he read?’ ‘Yes, he can read, if he finds himself in candles [i.e. if he buys himself candles]… I suppose he would be found fault with if he were discovered reading; he is there to mind his business, he has a duty to perform, and he has to attend to it in the first place, and I do not think it would be allowed down the pit’(n. 139, 141, 143, 158, 160). 2. Education. The mining workers want a law for the compulsory education of their children, as in factories. They declare that the clauses of the Act of 1860 which require a school certificate to be obtained before employing boys of 10 and 12 years of age are quite illusory. The ‘painstaking’ cross-examination conducted by the capitalist investigating magistrates on this subject is positively droll. ‘Is it (the Act) required more against the masters or against the parents?’ ‘It is required against both I think.’ ‘You cannot say whether it is required against one more than against the other?’ ‘No; I can hardly answer that question’ (n. 115, 116). ‘Does there appear to be any desire on the part of the employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable them to go to school?’ ‘No; the hours are never shortened for that purpose’ (n. 137). ‘Should you say that the colliers generally improve their education; have you any instances of men who have, since they began to work, greatly improved their education, or do they not rather go back, and lose any advantage that they may have gained?’ ‘They generally become worse; they do not improve; they acquire bad habits; they get on to drinking and gambling and such like, and they go completely to wreck’ (n. 211). ‘Do they make any attempt of the kind’ (for providing instruction) ‘by having schools at night?’ ‘There are few collieries where night schools are held, and perhaps at those collieries a few boys do go to those schools; but they are so physically exhausted that it is to no purpose that they go there’ (n. 454). ‘You are then,’ concludes the bourgeois, ‘against education?’ ‘Most certainly not; but,’ etc. (n. 443). ‘But are they’ (the employers) ‘not compelled to demand them?’ (school certificates) ‘By law they are; but I am not aware they are demanded by the employers.’ ‘Then it is your opinion, that this provision of the Act as to requiring certificates, is not generally carried out in the collieries?’ ‘It is not carried out’ (n. 443, 444). ‘Do the men take a great interest in this question?’ (of education) ‘The majority of them do’ (n. 717). ‘Are they very anxious to see the law enforced?’ ‘The majority are’ (n. 718). ‘Do you think that in this country any law that you pass… can really be effectual unless the population themselves assist in putting it into operation?’ ‘Many a man might wish to object to employing a boy, but he would perhaps become marked by it’ (n. 720). ‘Marked by whom?’ ‘By the employers’ (n. 721). ‘Do you think that the employers would find any fault with a man who obeyed the law…?’ ‘I believe they would’ (n. 722). ‘Have you ever heard of any workman objecting to employ a boy between 10 and 12, who could not write or read?’ ‘It is not left to men’s option’ (n. 123). ‘Would you call for the interference of Parliament?’ ‘I think that if anything effectual is to be done in the education of the colliers’ children, it will have to be made compulsory by Act of Parliament’ (n. 1634). ‘Would you lay that obligation upon the colliers only, or all the workpeople of Great Britain?’ ‘I came to speak for the colliers’ (n. 1636). ‘Why should you distinguish them’ (the colliery boys) ‘from other boys?’ ‘Because I think they are an exception to the rule’ (n. 1638). ‘In what respect?’ ‘In a physical respect’ (n. 1639). ‘Why should education be more valuable to them than to other classes of lads?’ ‘I do not know that it is more valuable; but through the over-exertion in mines there is less chance for the boys that are employed there to get education, either at Sunday schools, or at day schools’ (n. 1640). ‘It is impossible to look at a question of this sort absolutely by itself?’ (n. 1644). ‘Is there a suffciency of schools?’ ‘No’ (n. 1646). ‘If the State were to require that every child should be sent to school, would there be schools for the children to go to?’ ‘No; but I think if the circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forthcoming’ (n. 1647). ‘Some of them’ (the boys) ‘cannot read and write at all, I suppose?’ ‘The majority cannot… The majority of the men themselves cannot’ (n. 705,725). 3. Employment of women. Since 1842, women are no longer employed underground, but occupied on the surface in loading the coal, etc., in drawing the tubs to the canals and railway wagons, in sorting, etc. The numbers have increased considerably during the past three or four years (n. 1727). They are mostly the wives, daughters and widows of colliers, and their ages range from 12 to 50 or 60 years (n. 645, 1779). ‘What is the feeling among the working miners as to the employment of women?’ ‘I think they generally condemn it’ (n. 648). ‘What objection do you see to it?’ ‘I think it is degrading to the sex’ (n. 649). ‘There is a peculiarity of dress?’ ‘Yes… it is rather a man’s dress, and I believe in some cases, it drowns all sense of decency.’ ‘Do the women smoke?’ ‘Some do.’ ‘And I suppose it is very dirty work?’ ‘Very dirty.’ ‘They get black and grimy?’ ‘As black as those who are down the mines… I believe that a woman having children (and there are plenty on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her children’ (n. 650–54, 710). ‘Do you think that those widows could get employment anywhere else, which would bring them in as much wages as that?’ (from 8s. to 10s. a week). ‘I cannot speak to that’ (n. 709). ‘You would still be prepared, would you’ (stonyhearted fellow!) ‘to prevent their obtaining a livelihood by these means?’ ‘I would’ (n. 710). ‘What is the general feeling in the district… as to the employment of women?’ ‘The feeling is that it is degrading; and we wish as miners to have more respect to the fair sex than to see them placed on the pit bank… Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have raised as much as 10 tons of stuff a day’ (n. 1715, 1717). ‘Do you think that the women employed about the collieries are less moral than the women employed in the factories?’ ‘… the percentage of bad ones may be a little more… than with the girls in the factories’ (n. 1237). ‘But you are not quite satisfied with the state of morality in the factories?’ ‘No’ (n. 1733). ‘Would you prohibit the employment of women in factories also?’ ‘No, I would not’ (n. 1734). ‘Why not?’ ‘I think it a more honourable occupation for them in the mills’ (n. 1735). ‘Still it is injurious to their morality, you think?’ ‘Not so much as working on the pit bank; but it is more on the social position I take it; I do not take it on its moral ground alone. The degradation, in its social bearing on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. When these 400 or 500 girls become colliers’ wives, the men suffer greatly from this degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and drink’ (n. 1736). ‘You would be obliged to stop the employment of women in the ironworks as well, would you not, if you stopped it in the collieries?’ ‘I cannot speak for any other trade’ (n. 1737). ‘Can you see any difference in the circumstances of women employed in ironworks, and the circumstances of women employed above ground in collieries?’ ‘I have not ascertained anything as to that’ (n. 1740). ‘Can you see anything that makes a distinction between one class and the other?’ ‘I have not ascertained that, but I know from house to house visitation, that it is a deplorable state of things in our district…’ (n. 1741). ‘Would you interfere in every case with the employment of women where that employment was degrading?’ ‘It would become injurious, I think, in this way; the best feelings of Englishmen have been gained from the instruction of a mother…’ (n. 1750). ‘That equally applies to agricultural employments, does it not?’ ‘Yes, but that is only for two seasons, and they have work all the four seasons… They often work day and night, wet through to the skin, their constitution undermined and their health ruined’ (n. 1751). ‘You have not inquired more generally into that subject [i.e. the employment of women] perhaps?’ ‘I have certainly taken note of it as I have gone along, and certainly I have seen nothing parallel to the effects of the employment of women on the pit bank… It is the work of a man… a strong man’ (n. 1753, 1793, 1794). ‘Your feeling upon the whole subject is that the better class of colliers who desire to raise themselves and humanize themselves, instead of deriving help from the women, are pulled down by them?’ ‘Yes’ (n. 1808). After some further crooked questions from these bourgeois, the secret of their ‘sympathy’ for widows, poor families and so on emerges into the daylight. ‘The coal proprietor appoints certain gentlemen to take the oversight of the workings, and it is their policy, in order to receive approbation, to place things on the most economical basis they can, and these girls are employed at from Is. up to 1s. 6d. a day, where a man at the rate of 2s. 6d. a day would have to be employed’ (n. 1816). 4. Coroner’s Juries. ‘With regard to coroner’s inquests in your district, have the workmen confidence in the proceedings at those inquests when accidents occur?’ ‘No; they have not’ (n. 360). ‘Why not?’ ‘Chiefly because the men who are generally chosen, are men who know nothing about mines and such like.’ ‘Are not workmen summoned at all upon the juries?’ ‘Never but as witnesses to my knowledge.’ ‘Who are the people who are generally summoned upon these juries?’ ‘Generally tradesmen in the neighbourhood… from their circumstances they are sometimes liable to be influenced by their employers… the owners of the works. They are generally men who have no knowledge, and can scarcely understand the witnesses who are called before them, and the terms which are used and such like.’ ‘Would you have the jury composed of persons who had been employed in mining?’ ‘Yes, partly… they’ (the workers) ‘think that the verdict is not in accordance with the evidence given generally’ (n. 361, 364, 366, 368, 371, 375). ‘One great object in summoning a jury is to have an impartial one, is it not?’ ‘Yes, I should think so.’ ‘Do you think that the juries would be impartial if they were composed to a considerable extent of workmen?’ ‘I cannot see any motive which the workmen would have to act partially… they necessarily have a better knowledge of the operations in connection with the mine.’ ‘You do not think there would be a tendency on the part of the workmen to return unfairly severe verdicts?’ ‘No, I think not’(n. 378, 379, 380). 5. False weights and measures. The workers demand to be paid by the week instead of by the fortnight, and by weight instead of by the cubic content of the tubs; they also demand protection against the use of false weights, etc. (n. 1071). ‘If the tubs were fraudulently increased, a man could discontinue working by giving 14 days’ notice?’ ‘But if he goes to another place, there is the same thing going on there’ (n. 1071). ‘But he can leave that place where the wrong has been committed?’ ‘It is general; wherever he goes, he has to submit to it’ (n. 1072). ‘Could a man leave by giving 14 days’ notice?’ ‘Yes’ (n. 1073). So much for that! 6. Inspection of mines. Casualties from gas explosions are not the only things the workers suffer from (n. If.). ‘Our men complained very much of the bad ventilation of the collieries… the ventilation is so bad in general that the men can scarcely breathe; they are quite unfit for employment of any kind after they have been for a length of time in connection with their work; indeed, just at the part of the mine where I am working, men have been obliged to leave their employment and come home in consequence of that… some of them have been out of work for weeks just in consequence of the bad state of the ventilation where there is not explosive gas… there is plenty of air generally in the main courses, yet pains are not taken to get air into the workings where men are working.’ ‘Why do you not apply to the inspector?’ ‘To tell the truth there are many men who are timid on that point; there have been cases of men being sacrificed and losing their employment in consequence of applying to the inspector.’ ‘Why; is he a marked man for having complained?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘And he finds it difficult to get employment in another mine?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Do you think the mines in your neighbourhood are sufficiently inspected to insure a compliance with the provisions of the Act?’ ‘No; they are not inspected at all… the inspector has been down just once in the pit, and it has been going seven years… In the district to which I belong there are not a sufficient number of inspectors. We have one old man more than 70 years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries.’ ‘You wish to have a class of sub-inspectors?’ ‘Yes’ (n. 234, 241, 251, 254, 274, 275, 554, 276, 293). ‘But do you think it would be possible for Government to maintain such an army of inspectors as would be necessary to do all that you want them to do, without information from the men ?’ ‘No, I should think it would be next to impossible.’ ‘It would be desirable the inspectors should come oftener?’ ‘Yes, and without being sent for’ (n. 280,277). ‘Do you not think that the effect of having these inspectors examining the collieries so frequently would be to shift the responsibility (!) of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of the collieries to the Government officials?’ ‘No, I do not think that, I think that they should make it their business to enforce the Acts which are already in existence’ (n. 285). ‘When you speak of sub-inspectors, do you mean men at a less salary, and of an inferior stamp to the present inspectors?’ ‘I would not have them inferior, if you could get them otherwise’ (n. 294). ‘Do you merely want more inspectors, or do you want a lower class of men as an inspector?’ ‘A man who would knock about, and see that things are kept right; a man who would not be afraid of himself’ (n. 295). ‘If you obtained your wish in getting an inferior class of inspectors appointed, do you think that there would be no danger from want of skill, etc. ?’ ‘I think not, I think that the Government would see after that, and have proper men in that position’ (n. 297). This kind of examination at last becomes too much even for the chairman of the investigating committee, and he interrupts with the observation: ‘You want a class of men who would look into all the details of the mine, and would go into all the holes and corners, and go into the real facts… they would report to the chief inspector, who would then bring his scientific knowledge to bear on the facts they had stated?’ (n. 298, 299). ‘Would it not entail very great expense if all these old workings were kept ventilated?’ ‘Yes, expense might be incurred, but life would be at the same time protected’ (n. 531). A mining worker protests against Section 17 of the Act of 1860; he says: ‘At the present time, if the inspector of mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, he has to report it to the mine-owner and the Home Secretary. After doing that, there is given to the owner 20 days to look over the matter; at the end of 20 days he has the power to refuse making any alteration in the mine; but, when he refuses, the mine-owner writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time nominating five engineers, and from those five engineers named by the mine-owner himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, I think, as arbitrator, or appoints arbitrators from them; now we think in that case the mine-owner virtually appoints his own arbitrator’ (n. 581). Bourgeois examiner, himself a mine-owner: ‘But… is this a merely speculative objection?’ (n. 586). ‘Then you have a very poor opinion of the integrity of mining engineers?’ ‘It is most certainly unjust and inequitable’ (n. 588). ‘Do not mining engineers possess a sort of public character, and do not you think that they are above making such a partial decision as you apprehend?’ ‘I do not wish to answer such a question as that with respect to the personal character of those men. I believe that in many cases they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not to be in their hands to do so, where men’s lives are at stake’ (n. 589). The same bourgeois has the impudence to put this question: ‘Do you not think that the mine-owner also suffers loss from an explosion?’ Finally, ‘Are not you workmen in Lancashire able to take care of your own interests without calling in the Government to help you?’ ‘No’ (n. 1042). In the year 1865 there were 3, coal mines in Great Britain, and twelve inspectors. A Yorkshire mine-owner himself calculates (The Times, 26 January 1867) that, leaving aside the purely bureaucratic activities which absorb the whole of their time, each mine can be visited only once in ten years by an inspector. No wonder mining disasters have increased progressively, both in number and extent (sometimes with a loss of 200 to 300 men) during the last ten years. These are the beauties of ‘free’ capitalist production! Defective* as it is, the Act passed in 1872 is the first that regulates the hours of labour of children employed in mines, and makes exploiters and owners, to a certain extent, responsible for so-called accidents. The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into the employment in agriculture of children, young persons and women has published some very important reports. Several attempts have been made to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, in a modified form, to agriculture, but so far these attempts have failed totally. However, all I wish to point out here is that there exists an irresistible tendency towards the general application of those principles. If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades for the purpose of protecting the working class both in mind and body has become inevitable, on the other hand, as we have already pointed out, that extension hastens on the general conversion of numerous isolated small industries into a few combined industries carried on upon a large scale; it therefore accelerates the concentration of capital and the exclusive predominance of the factory system. It destroys both the ancient and the transitional forms behind which the dominion of capital is still partially hidden, and replaces them with a dominion which is direct and unconcealed. But by doing this it also generalizes the direct struggle against its rule. While in each individual workshop it enforces uniformity, regularity, order and economy, the result of the immense impetus given to technical improvement by the limitation and regulation of the working day is to increase the anarchy and the proneness to catastrophe of capitalist production as a whole, the intensity of labour, and the competition of machinery with the worker. By the destruction of small-scale and domestic industries it destroys the last resorts of the ‘redundant population’, thereby removing what was previously a safety-valve for the whole social mechanism. By maturing the material conditions and the social combination of the process of production, it matures the contradictions and antagonisms of the capitalist form of that process, and thereby ripens both the elements for forming a new society and the forces tending towards the overthrow of the old one. 10. LARGE-SCALE INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE      The revolution called forth by large-scale industry in agriculture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will be investigated later on. Here we shall merely indicate a few results by way of anticipation. If the use of machinery in agriculture is for the most part free from the injurious physical effect it has on the factory worker, its effect in making workers ‘redundant’ is more intense and comes up against less resistance, as we shall see later in detail. In the counties of Cambridgeshire and Suffolk, for example, the area of cultivated land has been much extended within the last twenty years* while in the same period the rural population has diminished, not only relatively, but absolutely. In the United States of America the workers are as yet only virtually replaced by agricultural machinery, i.e. the machines allow the producer to cultivate a larger area, but do not actually expel any agricultural labourers employed. In 1861 the number of persons occupied in England and Wales in the manufacture of agricultural machinery was 1,034, while the number of agricultural labourers employed in using agricultural machinery and steam-engines was only 1,205. In the sphere of agriculture, large-scale industry has a more revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for the reason that it annihilates the bulwark of the old society, the ‘peasant’, and substitutes for him the wage-labourer. Thus the need for social transformation, and the antagonism of the classes, reaches the same level in the countryside as it has attained in the towns. A conscious, technological application of science replaces the previous highly irrational and slothfully traditional way of working. The capitalist mode of production completes the disintegration of the primitive familial union which bound agriculture and manufacture together when they were both at an undeveloped and childlike stage. But at the same time it creates the material conditions for a new and higher synthesis, a union of agriculture and industry on the basis of the forms that have developed during the period of their antagonistic isolation. Capitalist production collects the population together in great centres, and causes the urban population to achieve an ever-growing preponderance. This has two results. On the one hand it concentrates the historical motive power of society; on the other hand, it disturbs the metabolic interaction between man and the earth, i.e. it prevents the return to the soil of its constituent elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing; hence it hinders the operation of the eternal natural condition for the lasting fertility of the soil. Thus it destroys at the same time the physical health of the urban worker, and the intellectual life of the rural worker. But by destroying the circumstances surrounding that metabolism, which originated in a merely natural and spontaneous fashion, it compels its systematic restoration as a regulative law of social production, and in a form adequate to the full development of the human race. In agriculture, as in manufacture, the capitalist transformation of the process of production also appears as a martyrology for the producer; the instrument of labour appears as a means of enslaving, exploiting and impoverishing the worker; the social combination of labour processes appears as an organized suppression of his individual vitality, freedom and autonomy. The dispersal of the rural workers over large areas breaks their power of resistance, while concentration increases that of the urban workers. In modern agriculture, as in urban industry, the increase in the productivity and the mobility of labour is purchased at the cost of laying waste and debilitating labour-power itself. Moreover, all progress in capitalist agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the worker, but of robbing the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time is a progress towards ruining the more long-lasting sources of that fertility. The more a country proceeds from large-scale industry as the background of its development, as in the case of the United States, the more rapid is this process of destruction. Capitalist production, therefore, only develops the techniques and the degree of combination of the social process of production by simultaneously undermining the original sources of all wealth – the soil and the worker.