Chapter 20: Time-Wages      Wages themselves again take many forms. This fact is not apparent from the ordinary economic treatises, which, in their crude obsession with the material side [Stoff], ignore all differences of form. An exposition of all these forms belongs to the special study of wage-labour, and not, therefore, to this work. Nevertheless, we shall have to give a brief description of the two fundamental forms here. The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, always takes place for definite periods of time. The converted form in which the daily value, weekly value, etc. of labour-power is directly presented is hence that of time-wages, therefore day-wages, etc. Next it is to be noted that the laws set forth in Chapter 17, on the changes in the relative magnitudes of price of labour-power and surplus-value, can be transformed, by a simple alteration in their form, into laws of wages. Similarly, the distinction between the exchange-value of labour-power and the sum of means of subsistence into which this value is converted now appears as the distinction between nominal and real wages. It would be useless to repeat here, when dealing with the form of appearance, what we have already worked out in relation to the essential form. We shall therefore limit ourselves to a few points which characterize time-wages. The sum of money which the worker receives for his daily or weekly labour forms the amount of his nominal wages, or of his wages estimated in value. But it is clear that according to the length of the working day, that is, according to the amount of actual labour supplied every day, the same daily or weekly wage may represent very different prices of labour, i.e. very different sums of money for the same quantity of labour. We must, therefore, in considering time-wages, again distinguish between the sum total of the daily or weekly wages, etc., and the price of labour. How then can we find this price, i.e. the money-value of a given quantity of labour? The average price of labour is the average daily value of labour-power divided by the average number of hours in the working day. If, for instance, the daily value of labour-power is 3 shillings, which is the value-product of 6 working hours, and if the working day is 12 hours, the price of 1 working hour is 3 8/ shillings, i.e. 3d. The price of the working hour thus found serves as the unit measure for the price of labour. It follows therefore that daily and weekly wages may remain the same, although the price of labour falls constantly. If, for example, the usual working day is 10 hours and the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, the price of the working hour is 3 3/5d. It falls to 3d. as soon as the working day rises to 12 hours, and to 2 2/5d. as soon as it rises to 15 hours. Despite all this, daily or weekly wages remain unchanged. Inversely, daily or weekly wages may rise, although the price of labour remains constant or even falls. If, for instance, the working day is 10 hours and the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, the price of one working hour is 3 3/5d. If the worker, owing to an increase in the number of orders, works for 12 hours, and the price of labour remains the same, his daily wage now rises to 3s. 1/5d., without any variation having taken place in the price of labour. The same result might follow if, instead of the extensive magnitude of labour, its intensive magnitude increased. The rise of nominal daily or weekly wages may therefore be unaccompanied by any change in the price of labour, or may even be accompanied by a fall in the latter. The same thing holds for the income of the worker’s family, when the quantity of labour provided by the head of the family is augmented by the labour of the members of his family. There are therefore methods of lowering the price of labour which are independent of any reduction in the nominal daily or weekly wage. However, as a general law it follows that, given the amount of daily, weekly labour, etc., the daily or weekly wage depends on the price of labour, which itself varies either with the value of labour-power, or with the divergencies between its price and its value. Given the price of labour, on the other hand, the daily or weekly wage depends on the quantity of labour expended daily or weekly. The unit of measurement for time-wages, the price of the working hour, is the value of a day’s labour-power divided by the number of hours in the average working day. Let the latter be 12 hours, and the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, the value-product of 6 hours of labour. Under these circumstances, the price of a working hour is 3d., and the value produced in it is 6d. If the worker is now employed for less than 12 hours a day (or for less than 6 days in the week), for instance only for 6 or 8 hours, he receives, at the price of labour just mentioned, only 2s. or 1s. 6d. a day. As, on our hypothesis, he must work on average 6 hours a day in order to produce a day’s wage which corresponds to nothing more than the value of his labour-power, and as, on the same hypothesis, he works only half of every hour for himself, and half for the capitalist, it is clear that he cannot obtain for himself the value-product of 6 hours if he is employed for less than 12 hours. In previous chapters we saw the destructive consequences of overwork; but here we come upon the origin of the sufferings which arise for the worker out of his being insufficiently employed. If the hour’s wage is fixed in such a way that the capitalist does not bind himself to pay a day’s or a week’s wage, but only to pay wages for the hours during which he chooses to employ the worker, he can employ him for a shorter time than that which is originally the basis of the calculation of the wages for the hour, or the unit of measurement of the price of labour. Since this unit is determined by the ratio of the daily value of labour-power to the working day of a given number of hours, it naturally loses all meaning as soon as the working day ceases to contain a definite number of hours. The connection between the paid and the unpaid labour is destroyed. The capitalist can now wring from the worker a certain quantity of surplus labour without allowing him the labour-time necessary for his own subsistence. He can annihilate all regularity of employment, and according to his own convenience, caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the most frightful over-work alternate with relative or absolute cessation of work. He can abnormally lengthen the working day without giving the worker any corresponding compensation, under the pretence of paying ‘the normal price of labour’. Hence the perfectly rational revolt of the London building workers in 1860* against the attempt of the capitalists to impose on them this sort of wage by the hour. The legal limitation of the working day puts an end to mischievous acts of this kind, though it does not of course end the diminution of employment caused by the competition of machinery, by changes in the quality of the workers employed, and partial or general crises. With an increase in the daily or weekly wage, the price of labour may remain nominally constant, and yet fall below its normal level. This occurs every time the working day is prolonged beyond its customary length, while the price of labour (reckoned per working hour) remains constant. If, in the fraction daily value of labour-power/working day, the denominator increases, working day the numerator increases still more rapidly. The amount of deterioration in labour-power, and therefore its value, increases with the duration of its functioning, and to a more rapid degree than the increase of that duration. In many branches of industry, where time-wages are the general rule and there are no legal limits to the length of the working day, the habit has therefore spontaneously grown up of regarding the working day as normal only up to a point in time, for instance up to the expiration of the tenth hour (‘normal working day’, ‘the day’s work’, ‘the regular hours of work’). Beyond this limit the working time is overtime, and is paid at a better hourly rate (‘extra pay)’, although often in a proportion which is ridiculously small. The normal working day exists here as a fraction of the actual working day, and over the year as a whole the latter is often more common than the former. The increase in the price of labour when the working day is extended beyond a certain normal limit takes place in various British industries in such a way that the low price of labour during the so-called normal time compels the worker to work during the better paid overtime, if he wishes to obtain a sufficient wage at all.8Legal limitation of the working day puts an end to this pastime. It is a generally known fact that the longer the working day in a branch of industry, the lower the wages are. The factory inspector Alexander Redgrave illustrates this by a comparative review of the twenty years from 1839 to 1859, according to which wages rose in the factories under the Ten Hours’ Act, while they fell in the factories where the work went on for 14 and 15 hours every day. From the law stated above,* namely that the price of labour being given, the daily or weekly wage depends on the quantity of labour expended, it follows, first of all, that the lower the price of labour, the greater must be the quantity of labour, or the longer must be the working day, for the worker to secure even a miserable average wage. The low level of the price of labour acts here as a stimulus to the extension of the labour-time. However, the extension of the period of labour produces in its turn a fall in the price of labour, and with this a fall in the daily or the weekly wage. The determination of the price of labour by use of the ratio daily value of labour-power/working day of a given number of hours shows that a mere prolongation of the working day lowers the price of labour, if no compensatory factor enters. But the same circumstances which allow the capitalist in the long run to prolong the working day also allow him at first, and compel him finally, to reduce the price of labour nominally as well until the total price of the increased number of hours goes down, and therefore the daily or weekly wage falls. Here we need only refer to two kinds of circumstance. If one man does the work of l 1/ or 2 men, the supply of labour increases, although the supply of labour-power on the market remains constant. The competition thus created between the workers allows the capitalist to force down the price of labour, while the fall in the price of labour allows him, on the other hand, to force up the hours of work still further. Soon, however, this command over abnormal quantities of unpaid labour, i.e. quantities in excess of the average social amount, becomes a source of competition amongst the capitalists themselves. A part of the price of the commodity consists of the price of labour. The unpaid part of the price of labour does not need to be reckoned as part of the price of the commodity. It may be given to the buyer as a present. This is the first step taken under the impulse of competition. The second step, also compelled by competition, is the exclusion from the selling price of the commodity of at least a part of the abnormal surplus-value created by the extension of the working day. In this way, an abnormally low selling price of the commodity arises, at first sporadically, and becomes fixed by degrees; this lower selling price henceforward becomes the constant basis of a miserable wage for excessive hours of work, just as originally it was the product of those very circumstances. This movement is simply indicated here, as the analysis of competition does not belong to this part of the investigation. Nevertheless, let the capitalist speak for himself, for a moment. ‘In Birmingham there is so much competition of masters one against another, that many are obliged to do things as employers that they would otherwise be ashamed of; and yet no more money is made, but only the public gets the benefit.’ The reader will remember the two sorts of London bakers, of whom one sold the bread at its full price (the ‘full-priced’ bakers), the other below its normal price (‘the underpnced’, ‘the undersellers’). * The ‘full-priced’ denounced their rivals before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry: ‘They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours’ work out of their men for 12 hours’ wages… The unpaid labour of the men was made… the source whereby the competition was carried on, and continues so to this day… The competition among the master-bakers is the cause of the difficulty in getting rid of night-work. An underseller, who sells his bread below the cost-price according to the price of flour, must make it up by getting more out of the labour of the men… If I got only 12 hours’ work out of my men, and my neighbour got 18 or 20, he must beat me in the selling price. If the men could insist on payment for overwork, this would be set right… A large number of those, employed by the undersellers are foreigners and youths, who are obliged to accept almost any wages they can obtain.’    This jeremiad is also interesting because it shows how it is only the semblance of the relations of production which is reflected by the brain of the capitalist. He does not know that the normal price of labour also includes a definite quantity of unpaid labour, and that this very unpaid labour is the normal source of his profits. The category of surplus labour-time does not exist at all for him, since it is included in the normal working day, which he thinks he has paid for in the day’s wages. But overtime, namely the prolongation of the working day beyond the limits corresponding to the usual price of labour, certainly does exist for him. When faced with his underselling competitor, he even insists upon extra pay for this overtime. Again, he does not know that this extra pay also includes unpaid labour, just as much as the price of the customary hour of labour does. For example, the price of one hour of the 12-hour working day is 3d., say the value-product of half a working hour, while the price of an overtime working hour is 4d., or the value-product of 2/ of a working hour. In the first case the capitalist appropriates one-half of the working hour, in the second case one third, without making any payment in return.